PART ONE
THIS IS THE BEGINNING*(48) OF THE ANCIENT WORD, here in this place
called Quiche.*(49) Here we shall inscribe, we shall implant the
Ancient Word, the potential and source for everything done in the
citadel of Quiche, in the nation of Quiche people.
And here*(50) we shall take up the demonstration, revelation, and
account of how things were put in shadow and brought to light*(51)
by the Maker, Modeler, named Bearer, Begetter,
Hunahpu Possum, Hunahpu Coyote,
Great White Peccary, Tapir,
Sovereign Plumed Serpent,
Heart of the Lake, Heart of the Sea,
Maker of the Blue-Green Plate,
Maker of the Blue-Green Bowl,
as they are called, also named, also described as
the midwife, matchmaker*(52)
named Xpiyacoc, Xmucane,
defender, protector,*(53)
twice a midwife, twice a matchmaker,
as is said in the words of Quiche. They accounted for everythingand did it, too- as enlightened beings, in enlightened words.*(54)
We shall write about this now amid the preaching of God, in
Christendom now.*(55) We shall bring it out because there is no longer
a place to see it,*(56) a Council Book,
a place to see "The Light That Came from
Across the Sea,"

Page 36 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

the account of "Our Place in the Shadows,"
a place to see "The Dawn of Life,"
as it is called. There is the original book and ancient writing, but
he who reads and ponders it hides his face.*(57) It takes a long
performance*(58) and account to complete the emergence of all the
sky-earth:
the fourfold siding, fourfold cornering,
measuring, fourfold staking,
halving the cord, stretching the cord
in the sky, on the earth,
the four sides, the four corners,*(59)
as it is said,
by the Maker, Modeler,
mother-father of life, of humankind,
giver of breath, giver of heart,
bearer, upbringer*(60) in the light that lasts*(61)
of those born in the light, begotten in the light;
worrier, knower of everything, whatever there is:
sky-earth, lake-sea.
THIS IS THE ACCOUNT, here it is:
Now it still ripples, now it still murmurs, ripples, it still sighs,
still hums, and it is empty*(62) under the sky.
Here follow the first words, the first eloquence:*(63)
There is not yet one person, one animal, bird, fish, crab, tree,
rock, hollow, canyon, meadow, forest. Only the sky alone is there; the
face of the earth is not clear. Only the sea alone is pooled under all
the sky; there is nothing whatever gathered together. It is at rest;
not a single thing stirs.*(64) It is held back,*(65) kept at rest
under the sky.
Whatever there is that might be is simply not there: only the pooled
water, only the calm sea, only it alone is pooled.
Whatever might be is simply not there: only murmurs, ripples, in the
dark, in the night. Only the Maker, Modeler alone, Sovereign Plumed
Serpent, the Bearers, Begetters are in the water, a glittering
light.*(66) They are there, they are enclosed in quetzal feathers,
in blue-green.
Thus the name, "Plumed Serpent." They are great knowers, great
thinkers in their very being.*(67)
And of course there is the sky, and there is also the Heart of
Sky. This is the name of the god,*(68) as it is spoken.
And then came his word, he came here to the Sovereign Plumed
Serpent, here in the blackness, in the early dawn.*(69) He spoke
with the Sovereign Plumed Serpent, and they talked, then they thought,
then they worried. They agreed with each other, they joined their
words, their thoughts.*(70) Then it was clear, then they reached
accord in the light, and then humanity was clear, when they
conceived the growth, the generation*(71) of trees, of bushes, and the
growth of life, of humankind, in the blackness, in the early dawn, all
because of the Heart of Sky, named Hurricane. Thunderbolt Hurricane

Page 37 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

comes first, the second is Newborn Thunderbolt, and the third is Raw
Thunderbolt.*(72)
So there were three of them, as Heart of Sky, who came to the
Sovereign Plumed Serpent, when the dawn of life was conceived:
"How should it be sown, how should it dawn?*(73) Who is to be the
provider, nurturer?"*(74)
"Let it be this way, think about it: this water should be removed,
emptied out for the formation of the earth's own plate and platform,
then comes the sowing, the dawning of the sky-earth. But there will be
no high days and no bright praise*(75) for our work, our design, until
the rise of the human work, the human design," they said.
And then the earth arose because of them, it was simply their word
that brought it forth. For the forming of the earth they said "Earth."
It arose suddenly, just like a cloud, like a mist, now forming,
unfolding. Then the mountains were separated from the water,*(76)
all at once the great mountains came forth. By their genius alone,
by their cutting edge alone*(77) they carried out the conception of
the mountain-plain, whose face grew instant groves of cypress and
pine.
And the Plumed Serpent was pleased with this:
"It was good that you came, Heart of Sky, Hurricane, and Newborn
Thunderbolt, Raw Thunderbolt. Our work, our design will turn out
well," they said.
And the earth was formed first, the mountain-plain. The channels
of water were separated; their branches wound their ways among the
mountains. The waters were divided when the great mountains appeared.
Such was the formation of the earth when it was brought forth by the
Heart of Sky, Heart of Earth, as they are called, since they were
the first to think of it.*(78) The sky was set apart, and the earth
was set apart in the midst of the waters.
Such was their plan when they thought, when they worried about the
completion of their work.
NOW THEY PLANNED THE ANIMALS OF THE MOUNTAINS, all the guardians
of the forests,*(79) creatures of the mountains: the deer, birds,
pumas, jaguars, serpents, rattlesnakes, yellowbites,*(80) guardians of
the bushes.
A Bearer, Begetter speaks:
"Why this pointless humming?*(81) Why should there merely be
rustling beneath the trees and bushes?"
"Indeed- they had better have guardians," the others replied. As
soon as they thought it and said it, deer and birds came forth.
And then they gave out homes to the deer and birds:
"You, the deer: sleep along the rivers, in the canyons. Be here in
the meadows, in the thickets, in the forests, multiply yourselves. You
will stand and walk on all fours," they were told.
So then they established the nests of the birds, small and great:
"You, precious birds:*(82) your nests, your houses are in the trees,
in the bushes. Multiply there, scatter there, in the branches of
trees, the branches of bushes," the deer and birds were told.

Page 38 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

When this deed had been done, all of them had received a place to
sleep*(83) and a place to stay. So it is that the nests of the animals
are on the earth, given by the Bearer, Begetter. Now the arrangement
of the deer and birds was complete.
AND THEN THE DEER AND BIRDS WERE TOLD by the Maker, Modeler, Bearer,
Begetter:
"Talk, speak out. Don't moan, don't cry out.*(84) Please talk,
each to each, within each kind, within each group," they were toldthe deer, birds, puma, jaguar, serpent.
"Name now our names, praise us. We are your mother, we are your
father. Speak now:
'Hurricane,
Newborn Thunderbolt, Raw Thunderbolt,
Heart of Sky, Heart of Earth,
Maker, Modeler,
Bearer, Begetter,'
speak, pray to us, keep our days," they were told. But it didn't
turn out that they spoke like people: they just squawked, they just
chattered, they just howled.*(85) It wasn't apparent what language
they spoke;*(86) each one gave a different cry. When the Maker,
Modeler heard this:
"It hasn't turned out well, they haven't spoken," they said among
themselves. "It hasn't turned out that our names have been named.
Since we are their mason and sculptor, this will not do," the
Bearers and Begetters said among themselves. So they told them:
"You will simply have to be transformed. Since it hasn't turned
out well and you haven't spoken, we have changed our word:
"What you feed on, what you eat, the places where you sleep, the
places where you stay, whatever is yours will remain in the canyons,
the forests. Although it turned out that our days were not kept, nor
did you pray to us, there may yet be strength in the keeper of days,
the giver of praise whom we have yet to make. Just accept your
service, just let your flesh be eaten.
"So be it, this must be your service," they were told when they were
instructed- the animals, small and great, on the face of the earth.
And then they wanted to test their timing again, they wanted to
experiment again, and they wanted to prepare for the keeping of days
again. They had not heard their speech among the animals; it did not
come to fruition and it was not complete.
And so their flesh was brought low: they served, they were eaten,
they were killed- the animals on the face of the earth.
AGAIN THERE COMES AN EXPERIMENT WITH THE HUMAN WORK, the
human
design, by the Maker, Modeler, Bearer, Begetter:
"It must simply be tried again. The time for the planting and
dawning is nearing. For this we must make a provider and nurturer. How
else can we be invoked and remembered on the face of the earth? We
have already made our first try at our work and design, but it
turned out that they didn't keep our days, nor did they glorify us.

Page 39 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

"So now let's try to make a giver of praise, giver of respect,
provider, nurturer," they said.
So then comes the building and working with earth and mud. They made
a body, but it didn't look good to them. It was just separating,
just crumbling, just loosening, just softening, just disintegrating,
and just dissolving. Its head wouldn't turn, either. Its face was just
lopsided, its face was just twisted. It couldn't look around. It
talked at first, but senselessly.*(87) It was quickly dissolving in
the water.
"It won't last," the mason and sculptor said then. "It seems to be
dwindling away, so let it just dwindle. It can't walk and it can't
multiply, so let it be merely a thought," they said.
So then they dismantled, again they brought down their work and
design. Again they talked:
"What is there for us to make that would turn out well, that would
succeed in keeping our days and praying to us?" they said. Then they
planned again:
"We'll just tell Xpiyacoc, Xmucane, Hunahpu Possum, Hunahpu
Coyote, to try a counting of days, a counting of lots,"*(88) the mason
and sculptor said to themselves. Then they invoked Xpiyacoc, Xmucane.
THEN COMES THE NAMING OF THOSE WHO ARE THE MIDMOST SEERS: the
"Grandmother of Day, Grandmother of Light," as the Maker, Modeler
called them. These are names of Xpiyacoc and Xmucane.
When Hurricane had spoken with the Sovereign Plumed Serpent, they
invoked the daykeepers, diviners, the midmost seers:
"There is yet to find, yet to discover how we are to model a person,
construct a person again, a provider, nurturer, so that we are
called upon and we are recognized: our recompense is in words.
Midwife, matchmaker,
our grandmother, our grandfather,
Xpiyacoc, Xmucane,
let there be planting, let there be the dawning
of our invocation, our sustenance, our recognition
by the human work, the human design,
the human figure, the human mass.*(89)
So be it, fulfill your names:
Hunahpu Possum, Hunahpu Coyote,
Bearer twice over, Begetter twice over,
Great Peccary, Great Tapir,
lapidary, jeweler,
sawyer, carpenter,
Maker of the Blue-Green Plate,
Maker of the Blue-Green Bowl,
incense maker, master craftsman,*(90)
Grandmother of Day, Grandmother of Light.
You have been called upon because of our work, our design. Run your
hands over the kernels of corn, over the seeds of the coral tree,*(91)
just get it done, just let it come out whether we should carve and
gouge a mouth, a face in wood," they told the daykeepers.

Page 40 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

And then comes the borrowing,*(92) the counting of days; the hand is
moved over the corn kernels, over the coral seeds, the days, the
lots.*(93)
Then they spoke to them, one of them a grandmother, the other a
grandfather.
This is the grandfather, this is the master of the coral seeds:
Xpiyacoc is his name.
And this is the grandmother, the daykeeper, diviner who stands
behind others:*(94) Xmucane is her name.
And they said, as they set out the days:
"Just let it be found, just let it be discovered,
say it, our ear is listening,
may you talk, may you speak,
just find the wood for the carving and sculpting
by the builder, sculptor.
Is this to be the provider, the nurturer
when it comes to the planting, the dawning?
You corn kernels, you coral seeds,
you days, you lots:
may you succeed, may you be accurate,"*(95)
they said to the corn kernels, coral seeds, days, lots. "Have shame,
you up there, Heart of Sky: attempt no deception*(96) before the mouth
and face of Sovereign Plumed Serpent," they said. Then they spoke
straight to the point:
"It is well that there be your manikins, woodcarvings,*(97) talking,
speaking, there on the face of the earth."
"So be it," they replied. The moment they spoke it was done: the
manikins, woodcarvings, human in looks and human in speech.
This was the peopling of the face of the earth:
They came into being, they multiplied, they had daughters, they
had sons, these manikins, woodcarvings. But there was nothing in their
hearts and nothing in their minds, no memory of their mason and
builder. They just went and walked wherever they wanted.*(98) Now they
did not remember the Heart of Sky.
And so they fell, just an experiment and just a cutout for
humankind. They were talking at first but their faces were dry. They
were not yet developed in the legs and arms. They had no blood, no
lymph. They had no sweat, no fat. Their complexions were dry, their
faces were crusty. They flailed their legs and arms, their bodies were
deformed.
And so they accomplished nothing before the Maker, Modeler who
gave them birth, gave them heart. They became the first numerous
people here on the face of the earth.
AGAIN THERE COMES A HUMILIATION, destruction, and demolition. The
manikins, woodcarvings were killed when the Heart of Sky devised a
flood for them. A great flood was made; it came down on the heads of
the manikins, woodcarvings.
The man's body was carved from the wood of the coral tree*(99) by
the Maker, Modeler. And as for the woman, the Maker, Modeler needed

Page 41 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

the pith of reeds*(100) for the woman's body. They were not competent,
nor did they speak before the builder and sculptor who made them and
brought them forth, and so they were killed, done in by a flood:
There came a rain of resin*(101) from the sky.
There came the one named Gouger of Faces: he gouged out their
eyeballs.
There came Sudden Bloodletter: he snapped off their heads.
There came Crunching Jaguar: he ate their flesh.
There came Tearing Jaguar: he tore them open.
They were pounded down to the bones and tendons, smashed and
pulverized even to the bones. Their faces were smashed because they
were incompetent before their mother and their father, the Heart of
Sky, named Hurricane. The earth was blackened because of this; the
black rainstorm*(102) began, rain all day and rain all night. Into
their houses came*(103) the animals, small and great. Their faces were
crushed by things of wood and stone. Everything spoke: their water
jars, their tortilla griddles, their plates, their cooking pots, their
dogs, their grinding stones, each and every thing crushed their faces.
Their dogs and turkeys*(104) told them:
"You caused us pain, you ate us, but now it is you whom we shall
eat." And this is the grinding stone:
"We were undone because of you.
Every day, every day,
in the dark, in the dawn, forever,
r-r-rip, r-r-rip,
r-r-rub, r-r-rub,*(105)
right in our faces, because of you.
This was the service we gave you at first, when you were still people,
but today you will learn of our power. We shall pound and we shall
grind your flesh," their grinding stones told them.
And this is what their dogs said, when they spoke in their turn:
"Why is it you can't seem to give us our food? We just watch and you
just keep us down, and you throw us around. You keep a stick ready
when you eat, just so you can hit us. We don't talk, so we've received
nothing from you. How could you not have known? You did know that we
were wasting away there, behind you.
"So, this very day you will taste the teeth in our mouths. We
shall eat you," their dogs told them, and their faces were crushed.
And then their tortilla griddles and cooking pots spoke to them in
turn:
"Pain! That's all you've done for us. Our mouths are sooty, our
faces are sooty. By setting us on the fire all the time, you burn
us. Since we felt no pain, you try it. We shall burn you," all their
cooking pots said, crushing their faces.
The stones, their hearthstones were shooting out,*(106) coming right
out of the fire, going for their heads, causing them pain. Now they
run for it, helter-skelter.
They want to climb up on the houses, but they fall as the houses
collapse.

Page 42 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

They want to climb the trees; they're thrown off by the trees.
They want to get inside caves, but the caves slam shut in their
faces.
Such was the scattering of the human work, the human design. The
people were ground down, overthrown. The mouths and faces of all of
them were destroyed and crushed. And it used to be said that the
monkeys in the forests today are a sign of this. They were left as a
sign because wood alone was used for their flesh*(107) by the
builder and sculptor.
So this is why monkeys look like people: they are a sign of a
previous human work, human design- mere manikins, mere woodcarvings.
THIS WAS WHEN THERE WAS JUST A TRACE OF EARLY DAWN on the face
of
the earth, there was no sun. But there was one who magnified
himself; Seven Macaw is his name. The sky-earth was already there, but
the face of the sun-moon was clouded over. Even so, it is said that
his light provided a sign for the people who were flooded. He was like
a person of genius in his being.
"I am great. My place is now higher than that of the human work, the
human design. I am their sun and I am their light, and I am also their
months.*(108)
"So be it: my light is great. I am the walkway and I am the foothold
of the people,*(109) because my eyes are of metal. My teeth just
glitter with jewels, and turquoise as well; they stand out*(110)
blue with stones like the face of the sky.
"And this nose of mine shines white into the distance like the moon.
Since my nest is metal, it lights up the face of the earth. When I
come forth before my nest, I am like the sun and moon for those who
are born in the light, begotten in the light. It must be so, because
my face reaches into the distance," says Seven Macaw.
It is not true that he is the sun, this Seven Macaw, yet he
magnifies himself, his wings, his metal. But the scope of his face
lies right around his own perch;*(111) his face does not reach
everywhere beneath the sky. The faces of the sun, moon, and stars
are not yet visible, it has not yet dawned.
And so Seven Macaw puffs himself up as the days and the months,
though the light of the sun and moon has not yet clarified. He only
wished for surpassing greatness. This was when the flood was worked
upon the manikins, woodcarvings.
And now we shall explain how Seven Macaw died, when the people
were vanquished, done in by the mason and sculptor.
PART_TWO
PART TWO
(See illustration: Drawings by the author.
THE FIRST NAMED HUNAHPU AND THE SECOND NAMED XBALANQUE:
These are
the portrait glyphs for the classic Maya equivalents of Hunahpu (left)
and Xbalanque (right) at Palenque.)

Page 43 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

HERE IS THE BEGINNING OF THE DEFEAT AND DESTRUCTION OF THE
DAY OF
SEVEN MACAW by the two boys, the first named Hunahpu and the second
named Xbalanque. Being gods, the two of them saw evil in his attempt
at self-magnification before the Heart of Sky. So the boys talked:
"It's no good without life, without people here on the face of the
earth."
"Well then, let's try a shot. We could shoot him while he's at his
meal. We could make him ill, then put an end to his riches, his
jade, his metal, his jewels, his gems, the source of his brilliance.
Everyone might do as he does, but it should not come to be that
fiery splendor is merely a matter of metal. So be it," said the
boys, each one with a blowgun on his shoulder, the two of them
together.
And this Seven Macaw has two sons: the first of these is Zipacna,
and the second is the Earthquake. And Chimalmat is the name of their
mother, the wife of Seven Macaw.
And this is Zipacna, this is the one to build up the great
mountains: Fire Mouth, Hunahpu, Cave by the Water, Xcanul, Macamob,
Huliznab, as the names of the mountains that were there at the dawn
are spoken. They were brought forth by Zipacna in a single night.
And now this is the Earthquake. The mountains are moved by him;
the mountains, small and great, are softened by him.*(112) The sons of
Seven Macaw did this just as a means of self-magnification.
"Here am I: I am the sun," said Seven Macaw.
"Here am I: I am the maker of the earth," said Zipacna.
"As for me, I bring down the sky, I make an avalanche of all the
earth," said Earthquake. The sons of Seven Macaw are alike, and like
him: they got their greatness from their father.
And the two boys saw evil in this, since our first mother and father
could not yet be made. Therefore deaths and disappearances were
planned by the two boys.
AND HERE IS THE SHOOTING OF SEVEN MACAW BY THE TWO BOYS. We
shall
explain the defeat of each one of those who engaged in
self-magnification.
This is the great tree of Seven Macaw, a nance, and this is the food
of Seven Macaw. In order to eat the fruit of the nance he goes up
the tree every day. Since Hunahpu and Xbalanque have seen where he
feeds, they are now hiding beneath the tree of Seven Macaw, they are
keeping quiet here, the two boys are in the leaves of the tree.
(See illustration: Photo 1980 by Justin Kerr.
THEY ARE NOW HIDING BENEATH THE TREE OF SEVEN MACAW: In this
classic
Maya vase painting from the lowlands, Seven Macaw is shown perched
in the top of a fruit tree. The tree itself is portrayed as animate,
with a face and ears at its base. Hidden behind the tree is Xbalanque,
whose pawlike hand protrudes above the tree's left ear. Crouching at
the right is Hunahpu, in the act of shooting Seven Macaw with his

Page 44 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

blowgun. The presence of a scorpion beneath the tree remains
unexplained.)
And when Seven Macaw arrived, perching over his meal, the nance,
it was then that he was shot by Hunahpu. The blowgun shot went right
to his jaw, breaking his mouth. Then he went up over the tree and fell
flat on the ground.*(113) Suddenly Hunahpu appeared, running. He set
out to grab him, but actually it was the arm of Hunahpu that was
seized by Seven Macaw. He yanked it straight back, he bent it back
at the shoulder. Then Seven Macaw tore it right out of Hunahpu. Even
so, the boys did well: the first round was not their defeat by Seven
Macaw.
And when Seven Macaw had taken the arm of Hunahpu, he went home.
Holding his jaw very carefully, he arrived:
"What have you got there?" said Chimalmat, the wife of Seven Macaw.
"What is it but those two tricksters!*(114) They've shot me, they've
dislocated my jaw.*(115) All my teeth are just loose,*(116) now they
ache. But once what I've got is over the fire- hanging there, dangling
over the fire- then they can just come and get it. They're real
tricksters!" said Seven Macaw, then he hung up the arm of Hunahpu.
Meanwhile Hunahpu and Xbalanque were thinking. And then they invoked
a grandfather, a truly white-haired grandfather, and a grandmother,
a truly humble grandmother- just bent-over, elderly people. Great
White Peccary is the name of the grandfather, and Great White Tapir is
the name of the grandmother. The boys said to the grandmother and
grandfather:
"Please travel with us when we go to get our arm from Seven Macaw;
we'll just follow right behind you. You'll tell him:
'Do forgive us*(117) our grandchildren, who travel with us. Their
mother and father are dead, and so they follow along there, behind us.
Perhaps we should give them away, since all we do is pull worms out of
teeth.' So we'll seem like children to Seven Macaw, even though
we're giving you the instructions," the two boys told them.
"Very well," they replied.
After that they approached the place where Seven Macaw was in
front of his home. When the grandmother and grandfather passed by, the
two boys were romping along behind them. When they passed below the
lord's house, Seven Macaw was yelling his mouth off because of his
teeth. And when Seven Macaw saw the grandfather and grandmother
traveling with them:
"Where are you headed, our grandfather?" said the lord.
"We're just making our living, your lordship," they replied.
"Why are you working for a living? Aren't those your children
traveling with you?"
"No, they're not, your lordship. They're our grandchildren, our
descendants, but it is nevertheless we who take pity on them. The
bit of food they get is the portion we give them, your lordship,"
replied the grandmother and grandfather. Since the lord is getting
done in by the pain in his teeth, it is only with great effort*(118)
that he speaks again:

Page 45 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

"I implore you, please take pity on me! What sweets can you make,
what poisons can you cure?"*(119) said the lord.
"We just pull the worms out of teeth,*(120) and we just cure
eyes.*(121) We just set bones, your lordship," they replied.
"Very well, please cure my teeth. They really ache, every day.
It's insufferable! I get no sleep because of them- and my eyes. They
just shot me, those two tricksters! Ever since it started I haven't
eaten because of it. Therefore take pity on me! Perhaps it's because
my teeth are loose now."
"Very well, your lordship. It's a worm, gnawing at the bone.*(122)
It's merely a matter of putting in a replacement and taking the
teeth out, sir."
"But perhaps it's not good for my teeth to come out- since I am,
after all, a lord. My finery is in my teeth- and my eyes."
"But then we'll put in a replacement. Ground bone will be put back
in." And this is the "ground bone": it's only white corn.
"Very well. Yank them out! Give me some help here!" he replied.
And when the teeth of Seven Macaw came out, it was only white corn
that went in as a replacement for his teeth- just a coating*(123)
shining white, that corn in his mouth. His face fell at once, he no
longer looked like a lord. The last of his teeth came out, the
jewels that had stood out blue from his mouth.
And then the eyes of Seven Macaw were cured. When his eyes were
trimmed back*(124) the last of his metal came out. Still he felt no
pain; he just looked on while the last of his greatness left him. It
was just as Hunahpu and Xbalanque had intended.
And when Seven Macaw died, Hunahpu got back his arm. And
Chimalmat, the wife of Seven Macaw, also died.
Such was the loss of the riches of Seven Macaw: only the doctors got
the jewels and gems that had made him arrogant, here on the face of
the earth. The genius of the grandmother, the genius of the
grandfather did its work when they took back their arm: it was
implanted and the break got well again. Just as they had wished the
death of Seven Macaw, so they brought it about. They had seen evil
in his self-magnification.
After this the two boys went on again. What they did was simply
the word of the Heart of Sky.*(125)
AND HERE ARE THE DEEDS OF ZIPACNA, the first son of Seven Macaw.
"I am the maker of mountains," says Zipacna.
And this is Zipacna, bathing on the shore. Then the Four Hundred
Boys passed by dragging a log, a post for their hut. The Four
Hundred Boys were walking along, having cut a great tree for the
lintel of their hut.*(126)
And then Zipacna went there, he arrived where the Four Hundred
Boys were:
"What are you doing, boys?"
"It's just this log. We can't lift it up to carry it."
"I'll carry it. Where does it go? What do you intend to use it for?"
"It's just a lintel for our hut."

Page 46 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

"Very well," he replied.
And then he pulled it, or rather carried it, right on up to the
entrance of the hut of the Four Hundred Boys.
"You could just stay with us, boy. Do you have a mother and father?"
"Not so," he replied.
"We'd like some help*(127) tomorrow in cutting another one of our
logs, a post for our hut."
"Good," he replied.
After that the Four Hundred Boys shared their thoughts:
"About this boy: what should we do with him?"
"We should kill him, because what he does is no good. He lifted that
log all by himself. Let's dig a big hole for him, and then we'll throw
him down*(128) in the hole. We'll say to him:
'Why are you spilling dirt in the hole?'*(129) And when he's
wedged*(130) down in the hole we'll wham a big log*(131) down behind
him. Then he should die in the hole," said the Four Hundred Boys.
And when they had dug a hole, one that went deep, they called for
Zipacna:
"We're asking you to please go on digging out the dirt. We can't
go on," he was told.
"Very well," he replied.
After that he went down in the hole.
"Call out when enough dirt has been dug, when you're getting down
deep," he was told.
"Yes," he replied, then he began digging the hole. But the only hole
he dug was for his own salvation. He realized that he was to be
killed, so he dug a separate hole to one side,*(132) he dug a second
hole for safety.
"How far is it?" the Four Hundred Boys called down to him.
"I'm digging fast. When I call up to you, the digging will be
finished," said Zipacna, from down in the hole. But he's not digging
at the bottom of the hole, in his own grave; rather, the hole he's
digging is for his own salvation.
After that, when Zipacna called out, he had gone to safety in his
own hole. Then he called out:
"Come here, take the dirt, the fill from the hole. It's been dug.
I've really gone down deep! Can't you hear my call? As for your
call, it just echoes down here, it sounds to me as if you were on
another level, or two levels away,"*(133) said Zipacna from his
hole. He's hidden in there, he calls out from down in the hole.
Meanwhile, a big log is being dragged along by the boys.
And then they threw the log down in the hole.
"Isn't he there? He doesn't speak."
"Let's keep on listening. He should cry out when he dies," they said
among themselves. They're just whispering, and they've hidden
themselves, each one of them, after throwing down the log.
And then he did speak, now he gave a single cry. He called out
when the log fell to the bottom.
"Right on! He's been finished!"

Page 47 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

"Very good! We've done him in, he's dead."
"What if he had gone on with his deeds, his works? He would've
made himself first among us and taken our place- we, the Four
Hundred Boys!" they said. Now they enjoyed themselves:
"On to the making of our sweet drink! Three days will pass, and
after three days let's drink to dedicate*(134) our hut- we, the Four
Hundred Boys!" they said. "And tomorrow we'll see, and on the day
after tomorrow we'll see whether or not ants come from the ground when
he's stinking and rotting. After that our hearts will be content
when we drink our sweet drink," they said. But Zipacna was listening
from the hole when the boys specified "the day after tomorrow."
And on the second day, when the ants collected, they were running,
swarming. Having taken their pickings*(135) under the log, they were
everywhere, carrying hair in their mouths and carrying the nails of
Zipacna. When the boys saw this:
"He's finished, that trickster! Look here how the ants have stripped
him, how they've swarmed. Everywhere they carry hair in their
mouths. It's his nails you can see. We've done it!" they said among
themselves.
But this Zipacna is still alive. He just cuts the hair off his
head and chews off his nails to give them to the ants.
And so the Four Hundred Boys thought he had died.
After that, their sweet drink was ready on the third day, and then
all the boys got drunk, and once they were drunk, all four hundred
of those boys, they weren't feeling a thing.
After that the hut was brought down on top of them by Zipacna. All
of them were completely flattened. Not even one or two were saved from
among all the Four Hundred Boys. They were killed by Zipacna, the
son of Seven Macaw.
Such was the death of those Four Hundred Boys. And it used to be
said that they entered a constellation, named Hundrath after them,
though perhaps this is just a play on words.*(136)
And this is where we shall explain the defeat of Zipacna by the
two boys, Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
NOW THIS IS THE DEFEAT AND DEATH OF ZIPACNA, when he was beaten by
the two boys, Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
What now weighed heavily on the hearts of the two boys was that
the Four Hundred Boys had been killed by Zipacna.
It's mere fish and crabs that Zipacna looks for in the waters, but
he's eating every day, going around looking for his food by day and
lifting up mountains by night.
Next comes the counterfeiting*(137) of a great crab by Hunahpu and
Xbalanque.
And they used bromelia flowers, picked from the bromelias of the
forests. These became the forearms*(138) of the crab, and where they
opened*(139) were the claws.*(140) They used a flagstone for the
back of the crab, which clattered.*(141)
After that they put the shell beneath an overhang,*(142) at the foot
of a great mountain. Meauan is the name of the mountain where the

Page 48 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

defeat took place.
After that, when the boys came along, they found Zipacna by the
water:
"Where are you going, boy?" Zipacna was asked.
"I'm not going anywhere. I'm just looking for my food, boys,"
Zipacna replied.
"What's your food?"
"Just fish and crabs, but there aren't any that I can find. It's
been two days since I stopped getting meals. By now I can't stand
the hunger,"*(143) Zipacna told Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
"There is that crab that's down in the canyon. A really big crab!
Perhaps you might manage to eat her. We were just getting bitten. We
wanted to catch her, but we got scared by her. If she hasn't gone away
you could catch her," said Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
"Take pity on me, please come point her out, boys,"*(144) said
Zipacna.
"We don't want to, but you go ahead. You can't miss her. Just follow
the river, and you go straight on over there below a great mountain.
She's clattering there at the bottom of the canyon. Just head on
over there," said Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
"But won't you please*(145) take pity on me? What if she can't be
found, boys? If you come along I'll show you a place where there are
plenty of birds.*(146) Please come shoot them, I know where they are,"
Zipacna replied. They consented. He went ahead of the boys.
"What if you can't catch the crab? Just as we had to turn back, so
will you. Not only didn't we eat her, but all at once she was biting
us. We were entering*(147) face down, but when she got scared we
were entering on our back.*(148) We just barely missed reaching her
then, so you'd better enter on your back," he was told.
"Very well," Zipacna replied, and then they went on. Now Zipacna had
company as he went. They arrived at the bottom of the canyon.
The crab is on her side, her shell is gleaming red there.*(149) In
under the canyon wall is their contrivance.
"Very good!" Zipacna is happy now. He wishes she were already in his
mouth, so she could really cure his hunger. He wanted to eat her, he
just wanted it face down, he wanted to enter, but since the crab got
on top of him with her back down, he came back out.
"You didn't reach her?" he was asked.
"No indeed- she was just getting on top with her back down. I just
barely missed her on the first try, so perhaps I'd better enter on
my back,"*(150) he replied.
After that he entered again, on his back. He entered all the wayonly his kneecaps were showing now!*(151) He gave a last sigh and
was calm.*(152) The great mountain rested on his chest. He couldn't
turn over now, and so Zipacna turned to stone.
Such, in its turn, was the defeat of Zipacna by the two boys,
Hunahpu and Xbalanque. He was "the maker of mountains," as his
previous pronouncements had it, the first son of Seven Macaw. He was
defeated beneath the great mountain called Meauan, defeated by

Page 49 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

genius alone. He was the second to magnify himself, and now we shall
speak what is spoken of another.
AND THE THIRD TO MAGNIFY HIMSELF IS THE SECOND SON OF SEVEN
MACAW,
NAMED EARTHQUAKE.
"I am the breaker of mountains," he said. But even so, Hunahpu and
Xbalanque defeated the Earthquake. Then Hurricane spoke, Newborn
Thunderbolt, Raw Thunderbolt; he spoke to Hunahpu and Xbalanque:
"The second son of Seven Macaw is another one, another who should be
defeated. This is my word, because what they do on the face of the
earth is no good. They are surpassing the sun in size, in weight,
and it should not be that way. Lure this Earthquake into settling
down*(153) over there in the east," Hurricane told the two boys.
"Very well, your lordship. There is more to be done. What we see
is no good. Isn't it a question of your position and your eminence,
sir, Heart of Sky?" the two boys said when they responded to the
word of Hurricane.
Meanwhile he presses on, this Earthquake, breaker of mountains. Just
by lightly tapping his foot on the ground he instantly demolishes
the mountains, great and small. When he met up with the two boys:
"Where are you going, boy?" they asked Earthquake.
"I'm not going anywhere. I just scatter the mountains, and I'm the
one who breaks them, in the course of the days, in the course of the
light,"*(154) he said when he answered. Then the Earthquake asked
Hunahpu and Xbalanque:
"Where did you come from? I don't know your faces. What are your
names?" said Earthquake.
"We have no names. We just hunt and trap in the mountains. We're
just orphans, we have nothing to call our own, boy. We're just
making our way among the mountains, small and great, boy. And
there's one great mountain we saw that's just growing right along.
It's rising really high! It's just swelling up, rising above all the
other mountains. And there weren't even one or two birds to be
found, boy. So how could it be that you destroy all mountains, boy?"
Hunahpu and Xbalanque said to Earthquake.
"It can't be true you saw the mountain you're talking about. Where
is it? You'll see me knock it down yet. Where did you see it?"
"Well, it's over there in the east," said Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
"Good. Lead the way,"*(155) the two boys were told.
"Not so. You take the middle. Stay here between us- one of us at
your left, the other at your right hand- because of our blowguns. If
there are birds, we'll shoot," they said. They enjoy practicing
their shooting.
And this is the way they shoot: the shot of their blowguns isn't
made of earth- they just blow at the birds when they shoot,*(156) to
the amazement of the Earthquake.
And then the boys made fire with a drill*(157) and roasted the birds
over the fire. And they coated one of the birds with plaster, they put
gypsum on it.

Page 50 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

(See illustration: Drawing by Carlos A. Villacorta: Photo
by
Hillel Burger (C) 1984 by the President and Fellows of Harvard
College.
AND THEN THE BOYS MADE FIRE WITH A DRILL: In this illustration
from the lowland Maya hieroglyphic book now known as the Madrid Codex,
two figures turn a fire drill while sparks fly up from the wooden
platform where the point of the drill is inserted. They are seated
on or beside a road, marked by footprints.)
"So this is the one we'll give him when he's hungry, and when he
savors the aroma of our birds. That will be victory, since we've
covered his bird with baked earth. In earth we must cook it, and in
earth must be his grave- if the great knower, the one to be made and
modeled,*(158) is to have a sowing and dawning," said the boys.
"Because of this, the human heart*(159) will desire a bite of
meat, a meal of flesh,*(160) just as the heart of the Earthquake
will desire it," Hunahpu and Xbalanque said to one another. Then
they roasted the birds and cooked them until they were brown, dripping
with fat that oozed from the backs of the birds, with an
overwhelmingly fragrant aroma.
And this Earthquake wants to be fed, his mouth just waters, he gulps
and slurps with spittle and saliva because of the fragrance of the
birds. So then he asked:
"What are you eating? I smell a truly delicious aroma! Please give
me a little bit," he said. And when they gave a bird to Earthquake, he
was as good as defeated.
After he had finished off the bird, they went on until they
arrived in the east, where the great mountain was.
Meanwhile, Earthquake had lost the strength in his legs and arms. He
couldn't go on because of the earth that coated the bird he'd eaten.
So now there was nothing he could do to the mountain. He never
recovered; he was destroyed. So then he was bound by the two boys; his
hands were bound behind him. When his hands had been secured by the
boys, his ankles were bound to his wrists.*(161)
After that they threw him down, they buried him in the earth.
Such is the defeat of Earthquake. It's Hunahpu and Xbalanque yet
again. Their deeds on the face of the earth are countless.
And now we shall explain the birth of Hunahpu and Xbalanque,
having first explained the defeat of Seven Macaw, along with Zipacna
and Earthquake, here on the face of the earth.
PART_THREE
PART THREE
AND NOW WE SHALL NAME THE NAME OF THE FATHER OF HUNAHPU AND
XBALANQUE. Let's drink to him, and let's just drink to the
telling*(162) and accounting of the begetting of Hunahpu and
Xbalanque. We shall tell just half of it, just a part of the account
of their father. Here follows the account.
These are the names: One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, as they are

Page 51 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

called.*(163)
And these are their parents: Xpiyacoc, Xmucane. In the blackness, in
the night, One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu were born to Xpiyacoc and
Xmucane.
And this One Hunahpu had two children, and the two were sons, the
firstborn named One Monkey and the second named One Artisan.
And this is the name of their mother: she is called Xbaquiyalo,
the wife of One Hunahpu. As for Seven Hunahpu, he has no wife. He's
just a partner*(164) and just secondary; he just remains a boy.
They are great thinkers and great is their knowledge. They are the
midmost seers, here on the face of the earth. There is only good in
their being and their birthright. They taught skills to One Monkey and
One Artisan, the sons of One Hunahpu. One Monkey and One Artisan
became flautists, singers, and writers; carvers, jewelers,
metalworkers*(165) as well.
(See illustration: Photo 1980 by Justin Kerr.
ONE MONKEY AND ONE ARTISAN BECAME FLAUTISTS, SINGERS, AND
WRITERS:
In this classic Maya funerary vase painting from northern Guatemala,
the twin monkey gods are shown seated in a cross-legged position,
pointing to screen-folded books while speaking or singing. The books
they hold in their hands have jaguar-skin covers; other books are
piled up at their feet. [Vase in the New Orleans Museum of Art.])
And as for One and Seven Hunahpu, all they did was throw dice and
play ball, every day. They would play each other in pairs, the four of
them together. When they gathered in the ball court for
entertainment a falcon would come to watch them, the messenger of
Hurricane, Newborn Thunderbolt, Raw Thunderbolt. And for this falcon
it wasn't far to the earth here, nor was it far to Xibalba; he could
get back to the sky, to Hurricane, in an instant.
The four ballplayers*(166) remained here on the face of the earth
after the mother of One Monkey and One Artisan had died. Since it
was on the road to Xibalba that they played, they were heard by One
Death and Seven Death, the lords of Xibalba:
"What's happening on the face of the earth? They're just stomping
and shouting. They should be summoned to come play ball here. We'll
defeat them, since we simply get no deference from them. They show
no respect, nor do they have any shame. They're really determined to
run right over us!"*(167) said all of Xibalba, when they all shared
their thoughts, the ones named One and Seven Death. They are great
lawgivers.
AND THESE ARE THE LORDS OVER EVERYTHING, each lord with a
commission
and a domain assigned by One and Seven Death:
There are the lords named House Corner and Blood Gatherer. And
this is their commission: to draw blood from people.*(168)
Next are the lordships of Pus Master and Jaundice Master. And this
is their domain: to make people swell up, to make pus come out of
their legs, to make their faces yellow, to cause jaundice,*(169) as it

Page 52 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

is called. Such is the domain of Pus Master and Jaundice Master.
Next are the lords Bone Scepter and Skull Scepter, the staff bearers
of Xibalba; their staffs are just bones. And this is their
staff-bearing: to reduce people to bones, right down to the bones
and skulls, until they die from emaciation and edema.*(170) This is
the commission of the ones named Bone Scepter and Skull Scepter.
Next are the lords named Trash Master and Stab Master. This is their
commission: just to catch up with people*(171) whenever they have
filth or grime in the doorway of the house,*(172) the patio of the
house.*(173) Then they're struck, they're just punctured until they
crawl on the ground, then die. And this is the domain of Trash
Master and Stab Master, as they are called.
Next are the lords named Wing and Packstrap. This is their domain:
that people should die in the road, just "sudden death,"*(174) as it
is called. Blood comes to the mouth, then there is death from vomiting
blood. So to each of them his burden, the load on his shoulders:
just to strike people on the neck and chest. Then there is death in
the road, and then they just go on causing suffering, whether one is
coming or going. And this is the domain of Wing and Packstrap.
Such are those who shared their thoughts*(175) when they were piqued
and driven*(176) by One and Seven Hunahpu. What Xibalba desired was
the gaming equipment of One and Seven Hunahpu: their kilts, their
yokes, their arm guards, their panaches and headbands, the costumes of
One and Seven Hunahpu.
And this is where we shall continue telling of their trip to
Xibalba. One Monkey and One Artisan, the sons of One Hunahpu, stayed
behind. Their mother died- and, what is more, they were to be defeated
by Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
(See illustration: Drawing reproduced by permission of
Michael D.
Coe and the Grolier Club.
AND THESE ARE THE LORDS OVER EVERYTHING: This late classic Maya
funerary vase painting from northern Guatemala shows seven lords of
Xibalba, with the head lord, corresponding to One Death of the Popol
Vuh, smoking a cigar and sitting on a jaguar skin at right. The two
lords immediately to his left may be Bone Scepter (in the bottom
row) and Skull Scepter (in the top row), one with a staff that looks
like a spinal column in front of him and the other with a rounded
bundle that could contain a skull. All seven lords wear ball game
yokes on their hips. The Popol Vuh mentions fourteen lords, counting
two manikins that are meant to be mistaken for lords. Perhaps each
pair of names mentioned in the Popol Vuh originally belonged to a
single lord, or perhaps each of the lords shown here is understood
to have another seated at his side.)
AND NOW FOR THE MESSENGERS OF ONE AND SEVEN DEATH: "You're
going,
you Military Keepers of the Mat, to summon One and Seven Hunahpu.
You'll tell them, when you arrive:
'"They must come," the lords say to you. "Would that they might come

Page 53 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

to play ball with us here. Then we could have some excitement with
them. We are truly amazed at them. Therefore they should come," say
the lords, "and they should bring their playthings, their yokes and
arm guards should come, along with their rubber ball," say the lords,'
you will say when you arrive," the messengers were told.
And these messengers of theirs are owls:*(177) Shooting Owl,
One-legged Owl, Macaw Owl, Skull Owl, as the messengers of Xibalba are
called.
There is Shooting Owl, like a point, just piercing.
And there is One-legged Owl, with just one leg; he has wings.
And there is Macaw Owl, with a red back; he has wings.
And there is also Skull Owl, with only a head alone; he has no legs,
but he does have wings.
There are four messengers, Military Keepers of the Mat in rank.
And when they came out of Xibalba they arrived quickly, alighting
above the ball court where One and Seven Hunahpu were playing, at
the ball court called Great Abyss at Carchah. The owls, arriving in
a flurry over the ball court, now repeated their words, reciting the
exact words*(178) of One Death, Seven Death, Pus Master, Jaundice
Master, Bone Scepter, Skull Scepter, House Corner, Blood Gatherer,
Trash Master, Stab Master, Wing, Packstrap, as all the lords are
named. Their words were repeated by the owls.
"Don't the lords One and Seven Death speak truly?"*(179)
"Truly indeed," the owls replied. "We'll accompany you.
'They're to bring along all their gaming equipment,' say the lords."
"Very well, but wait for us while we notify our mother," they
replied.
And when they went to their house, they spoke to their mother; their
father had died:
"We're going, our dear mother, even though we've just arrived.*(180)
The messengers of the lord have come to get us:
'"They should come," he says,' they say, giving us orders. We'll
leave our rubber ball behind here," they said, then they went to tie
it up under the roof of the house. "Until we return- then we'll put it
in play again."
They told One Monkey and One Artisan:
"As for you, just play and just sing,*(181) write and carve to
warm our house and to warm the heart of your grandmother." When they
had been given their instructions, their grandmother Xmucane sobbed,
she had to weep.
"We're going, we're not dying. Don't be sad," said One and Seven
Hunahpu, then they left.
AFTER THAT ONE AND SEVEN HUNAHPU LEFT, guided down the road by the
messengers.
And then they descended the road to Xibalba, going down a steep
cliff, and they descended until they came out where the rapids cut
through,*(182) the roaring canyon narrows named Neck Canyon. They
passed through there, then they passed on into the River of Churning
Spikes. They passed through countless spikes but they were not

Page 54 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

stabbed.
And then they came to water again, to blood: Blood River. They
crossed but did not drink. They came to a river, but a river filled
with pus. Still they were not defeated, but passed through again.
And then they came to the Crossroads, but here they were defeated,
at the Crossroads:
Red Road was one and Black Road another.
White Road was one and Yellow Road another.
There were four roads, and Black Road spoke:
"I am the one you are taking. I am the lord's road," said the
road. And they were defeated there: this was the Road of Xibalba.
And then they came to the council place of the lords of Xibalba, and
they were defeated again there. The ones seated first there are just
manikins, just woodcarvings dressed up by Xibalba. And they greeted
the first ones:
"Morning,*(183) One Death," they said to the manikin. "Morning,
Seven Death," they said to the woodcarving in turn.
So they did not win out, and the lords of Xibalba shouted out with
laughter over this. All the lords just shouted with laughter because
they had triumphed; in their hearts they had beaten One and Seven
Hunahpu. They laughed on until One and Seven Death spoke:
"It's good that you've come. Tomorrow you must put your yokes and
arm guards into action," they were told.
"Sit here on our bench," they were told, but the only bench they
were offered was a burning-hot rock.
So now they were burned on the bench; they really jumped around on
the bench now, but they got no relief.*(184) They really got up
fast, having burned their butts. At this the Xibalbans laughed
again, they began to shriek with laughter, the laughter rose up like a
serpent in their very cores,*(185) all the lords of Xibalba laughed
themselves down to their blood and bones.*(186)
"Just go in the house. Your torch and cigars will be brought to your
sleeping quarters," the boys were told.
After that they came to the Dark House, a house with darkness
alone inside. Meanwhile the Xibalbans shared their thoughts:
"Let's just sacrifice them tomorrow. It can only turn out to be
quick; they'll die quickly because of our playing equipment, our
gaming things," the Xibalbans are saying among themselves.
This ball of theirs is just a spherical knife.*(187) White Dagger is
the name of the ball, the ball of Xibalba. Their ball is just ground
down to make it smooth; the ball of Xibalba is just surfaced with
crushed bone to make it firm.
AND ONE AND SEVEN HUNAHPU WENT INSIDE DARK HOUSE.
And then their torch was brought,*(188) only one torch, already lit,
sent by One and Seven Death, along with a cigar for each of them, also
already lit, sent by the lords. When these were brought to One and
Seven Hunahpu they were cowering,*(189) here in the dark. When the
bearer of their torch and cigars arrived, the torch was bright as it
entered; their torch and both of their cigars were burning. The bearer

Page 55 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

spoke:
"'They must be sure to return them in the morning- not finished, but
just as they look now. They must return them intact,' the lords say to
you," they were told, and they were defeated. They finished the
torch and they finished the cigars that had been brought to them.
And Xibalba is packed with tests, heaps and piles of tests.
This is the first one: the Dark House, with darkness alone inside.
And the second is named Rattling House, heavy with cold inside,
whistling with drafts, clattering with hail.*(190) A deep chill
comes inside here.
And the third is named Jaguar House, with jaguars alone inside,
jostling one another, crowding together, with gnashing teeth.
They're scratching around; these jaguars are shut inside the house.
Bat House is the name of the fourth test, with bats alone inside the
house, squeaking, shrieking, darting through the house. The bats are
shut inside; they can't get out.
And the fifth is named Razor House, with blades alone inside. The
blades are moving back and forth,*(191) ripping, slashing through
the house.
These are the first tests of Xibalba, but One and Seven Hunahpu
never entered into them, except for the one named earlier, the
specified test house.
And when One and Seven Hunahpu went back before One and Seven Death,
they were asked:
"Where are my cigars? What of my torch? They were brought to you
last night!"
"We finished them, your lordship."
"Very well. This very day, your day is finished, you will die, you
will disappear, and we shall break you off. Here you will hide your
faces: you are to be sacrificed!" said One and Seven Death.
And then they were sacrificed and buried. They were buried at the
Place of Ball Game Sacrifice, as it is called. The head of One Hunahpu
was cut off; only his body was buried with his younger brother.
"Put his head in the fork of the tree that stands by the
road,"*(192) said One and Seven Death.
And when his head was put in the fork of the tree, the tree bore
fruit. It would not have had any fruit, had not the head of One
Hunahpu been put in the fork of the tree.
This is the calabash tree, as we call it today, or "the head of
One Hunahpu," as it is said.
And then One and Seven Death were amazed at the fruit of the tree.
The fruit grows out everywhere, and it isn't clear where the head of
One Hunahpu is; now it looks just the way the calabashes look. All the
Xibalbans see this, when they come to look.
The state of the tree loomed large in their thoughts, because it
came about at the same time the head of One Hunahpu was put in the
fork. The Xibalbans said among themselves:
"No one is to pick the fruit, nor is anyone to go beneath the tree,"
they said. They restricted themselves; all of Xibalba held back.

Page 56 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

It isn't clear which is the head of One Hunahpu; now it's exactly
the same as the fruit of the tree. Calabash tree came to be its
name, and much was said about it. A maiden heard about it, and here we
shall tell of her arrival.
AND HERE IS THE ACCOUNT OF A MAIDEN, the daughter of a lord named
Blood Gatherer.
And this is when a maiden heard of it, the daughter of a lord. Blood
Gatherer is the name of her father, and Blood Woman is the name of the
maiden.
And when he heard the account of the fruit of the tree, her father
retold it. And she was amazed at the account:
"I'm not acquainted with that tree they talk about. '"Its fruit is
truly sweet!" they say,' I hear,"*(193) she said.
Next, she went all alone and arrived where the tree stood. It
stood at the Place of Ball Game Sacrifice:
"What? Well! What's the fruit of this tree? Shouldn't this tree bear
something sweet? They shouldn't die, they shouldn't be wasted.
Should I pick one?" said the maiden.
And then the bone spoke; it was here in the fork of the tree:
"Why do you want a mere bone, a round thing in the branches of a
tree?" said the head of One Hunahpu when it spoke to the maiden.
"You don't want it," she was told.
"I do want it," said the maiden.
"Very well. Stretch out your right hand here,*(194) so I can see
it," said the bone.
"Yes," said the maiden. She stretched out her right hand, up there
in front of the bone.
And then the bone spit out its saliva, which landed squarely in
the hand of the maiden.
And then she looked in her hand, she inspected it right away, but
the bone's saliva wasn't in her hand.
"It is just a sign I have given you, my saliva, my spittle.*(195)
This, my head, has nothing on it- just bone, nothing of meat. It's
just the same with the head of a great lord: it's just the flesh
that makes his face look good. And when he dies, people get frightened
by his bones. After that, his son is like his saliva, his spittle,
in his being, whether it be the son of a lord or the son of a
craftsman, an orator. The father does not disappear, but goes on being
fulfilled. Neither dimmed nor destroyed is the face of a lord, a
warrior, craftsman, orator. Rather, he will leave his daughters and
sons. So it is that I have done likewise through you. Now go up
there on the face of the earth; you will not die. Keep the word.*(196)
So be it," said the head of One and Seven Hunahpu- they were of one
mind*(197) when they did it.
This was the word Hurricane, Newborn Thunderbolt, Raw Thunderbolt
had given them. In the same way, by the time the maiden returned to
her home, she had been given many instructions. Right away something
was generated in her belly, from the saliva alone, and this was the
generation of Hunahpu and Xbalanque.

Page 57 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

And when the maiden got home and six months had passed, she was
found out by her father. Blood Gatherer is the name of her father.
AND AFTER THE MAIDEN WAS NOTICED BY HER FATHER, when he saw that
she
was now with child, all the lords then shared their thoughts- One
and Seven Death, along with Blood Gatherer:
"This daughter of mine is with child, lords. It's just a
bastard,"*(198) Blood Gatherer said when he joined the lords.
"Very well. Get her to open her mouth.*(199) If she doesn't tell,
then sacrifice her. Go far away and sacrifice her."
"Very well, your lordships," he replied. After that, he questioned
his daughter:
"Who is responsible for the child in your belly, my daughter?" he
said.
"There is no child, my father, sir; there is no man whose face
I've known,"*(200) she replied.
"Very well. It really is a bastard you carry! Take her away for
sacrifice, you Military Keepers of the Mat. Bring back her heart in
a bowl, so the lords can take it in their hands*(201) this very
day," the owls were told, the four of them.
Then they left, carrying the bowl. When they left they took the
maiden by the hand, bringing along the White Dagger, the instrument of
sacrifice.
"It would not turn out well if you sacrificed me, messengers,
because it is not a bastard that's in my belly. What's in my belly
generated all by itself when I went to marvel at the head of One
Hunahpu, which is there at the Place of Ball Game Sacrifice. So please
stop:*(202) don't do your sacrifice, messengers," said the maiden.
Then they talked:
"What are we going to use in place of her heart? We were told by her
father:
'Bring back her heart. The lords will take it in their hands, they
will satisfy themselves, they will make themselves familiar with its
composition.*(203) Hurry, bring it back in a bowl, put her heart in
the bowl.' Isn't that what we've been told? What shall we deliver in
the bowl? What we want above all is that you should not die," said the
messengers.
"Very well. My heart must not be theirs, nor will your homes be
here.*(204) Nor will you simply force people to die, but hereafter,
what will be truly yours will be the true bearers of bastards. And
hereafter, as for One and Seven Death, only blood,*(205) only
nodules of sap, will be theirs. So be it that these things are
presented before them, and not that hearts are burned before them.
So be it: use the fruit of a tree,"*(206) said the maiden. And it
was red tree sap she went out to gather in the bowl.
After it congealed, the substitute for her heart became round.
When the sap of the croton tree was tapped, tree sap like blood, it
became the substitute for her blood. When she rolled the blood
around inside there, the sap of the croton tree, it formed a surface

Page 58 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

like blood,*(207) glistening red now, round inside the bowl. When
the tree was cut open by the maiden, the so-called cochineal croton,
the sap is what she called blood, and so there is talk of "nodules
of blood."*(208)
"So you have been blessed with the face of the earth. It shall be
yours," she told the owls.
"Very well, maiden. We'll show you the way up there. You just walk
on ahead; we have yet to deliver this apparent duplicate of your heart
before the lords," said the messengers.
And when they came before the lords, they were all watching closely:
"Hasn't it turned out well?" said One Death.
"It has turned out well, your lordships, and this is her heart. It's
in the bowl."
"Very well. So I'll look," said One Death, and when he lifted it
up with his fingers,*(209) its surface was soaked with gore, its
surface glistened red with blood.
"Good. Stir up the fire, put it over the fire," said One Death.
After that they dried it over the fire, and the Xibalbans savored
the aroma. They all ended up standing here, they leaned over it
intently.*(210) They found the smoke of the blood to be truly sweet!
And while they stayed at their cooking, the owls went to show the
maiden the way out. They sent her up through a hole onto the earth,
and then the guides returned below.
In this way the lords of Xibalba were defeated by a maiden; all of
them were blinded.
And here, where the mother of One Monkey and One Artisan*(211)
lived, was where the woman named Blood Woman arrived.
AND WHEN THE BLOOD WOMAN CAME TO THE MOTHER OF ONE MONKEY
AND ONE
ARTISAN, her children were still in her belly, but it wasn't very long
before the birth of Hunahpu and Xbalanque, as they are called.
And when the woman came to the grandmother, the woman said to the
grandmother:
"I've come, mother, madam.*(212) I'm your daughter-in-law and I'm
your child,*(213) mother, madam," she said when she came here to the
grandmother.
"Where do you come from? As for my lastborn children,*(214) didn't
they die in Xibalba? And these two remain as their sign and their
word: One Monkey and One Artisan are their names. So if you've come to
see my children, get out of here!" the maiden was told by the
grandmother.
"Even so, I really am your daughter-in-law. I am already his, I
belong to One Hunahpu. What I carry is his. One Hunahpu and Seven
Hunahpu are alive, they are not dead. They have merely made a way
for the light to show itself,*(215) madam mother-in-law, as you will
see when you look at the faces of what I carry," the grandmother was
told.
And One Monkey and One Artisan have been keeping their grandmother
entertained: all they do is play and sing, all they work at is writing

Page 59 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

and carving, every day, and this cheers the heart of their
grandmother.
And then the grandmother said:
"I don't want you, no thanks, my daughter-in-law. It's just a
bastard in your belly, you trickster! These children of mine who are
named by you are dead," said the grandmother.
"Truly, what I say to you is so!"*(216)
"Very well, my daughter-in-law, I hear you. So get going, get
their food so they can eat. Go pick a big netful of corn, then come
back- since you are already my daughter-in-law,*(217) as I
understand it," the maiden was told.
"Very well," she replied.
After that, she went to the garden;*(218) One Monkey and One Artisan
had a garden. The maiden followed the path they had cleared and
arrived there in the garden, but there was only one clump,*(219) there
was no other plant, no second or third. That one clump had borne its
ears. So then the maiden's heart stopped:
"It looks like I'm a sinner, a debtor! Where will I get the netful
of food she asked for?" she said. And then the guardians of food
were called upon by her:
"Come thou, rise up, come thou, stand up:*(220)
Generous Woman, Harvest Woman,
Cacao Woman, Cornmeal Woman,
thou guardian of the food of One Monkey, One Artisan,"
said the maiden.
And then she took hold of the silk, the bunch of silk at the top
of the ear. She pulled it straight out, she didn't pick the ear, and
the ear reproduced itself to make food for the net. It filled the
big net.
And then the maiden came back, but animals carried her net. When she
got back she went to put the pack frame in the corner of the house, so
it would look to the grandmother as if she had arrived with a load.
And then, when the grandmother saw the food, a big netful:
"Where did that food of yours come from? You've leveled the place!
I'm going to see if you've brought back our whole garden!" said the
grandmother.
And then she went off, she went to look at the garden, but the one
clump was still there, and the place where the net had been put at the
foot of it was still obvious.
And the grandmother came back in a hurry, and she got back home, and
she said to the maiden:
"The sign is still there. You really are my daughter-in-law! I'll
have to keep watching what you do. These grandchildren of mine are
already showing genius," the maiden was told.
Now this is where we shall speak of the birth of Hunahpu and
Xbalanque.
AND THIS IS THEIR BIRTH; WE SHALL TELL OF IT HERE.
Then it came to the day of their birth, and the maiden named Blood
Woman gave birth. The grandmother was not present when they were born;

Page 60 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

they were born suddenly. Two of them were born, named Hunahpu and
Xbalanque. They were born in the mountains, and then they came into
the house. Since they weren't sleeping:
"Throw them out of here! They're really loudmouths!" said the
grandmother.
After that, when they put them on an anthill, they slept soundly
there. And when they removed them from there, they put them in
brambles next.
And this is what One Monkey and One Artisan wanted: that they should
die on the anthill and die in the brambles. One Monkey and One Artisan
wanted this because they were rowdyish and flushed with
jealousy.*(221) They didn't allow their younger brothers in the
house at first, as if they didn't even know them, but even so they
flourished in the mountains.
And One Monkey and One Artisan were great flautists and singers, and
as they grew up they went through great suffering and pain. It had
cost them suffering to become great knowers. Through it all they
became flautists, singers, and writers, carvers. They did everything
well. They simply knew it when they were born, they simply had genius.
And they were the successors*(222) of their fathers who had gone to
Xibalba, their dead fathers.
Since One Monkey and One Artisan were great knowers, in their hearts
they already realized everything when their younger brothers came into
being, but they didn't reveal their insight because of their jealousy.
The anger in their hearts came down on their own heads;*(223) no great
harm was done. They were decoyed*(224) by Hunahpu and Xbalanque, who
merely went out shooting every day. These two got no love from the
grandmother, or from One Monkey and One Artisan. They weren't given
their meals; the meals had been prepared and One Monkey and One
Artisan had already eaten them before they got there.
But Hunahpu and Xbalanque aren't turning red with anger; rather,
they just let it go, even though they know their proper place, which
they see as clear as day. So they bring birds when they arrive each
day, and One Monkey and One Artisan eat them. Nothing whatsoever is
given to Hunahpu and Xbalanque, either one of them. All One Monkey and
One Artisan do is play and sing.
And then Hunahpu and Xbalanque arrived again, but now they came in
here without bringing their birds, so the grandmother turned red:
"What's your reason for not bringing birds?" Hunahpu and Xbalanque
were asked.
"There are some, our dear grandmother, but our birds just got hung
up in a tree,"*(225) they said, "and there's no way to get up the tree
after them, our dear grandmother, and so we'd like our elder
brothers to please go with us, to please go get the birds down,"
they said.
"Very well. We'll go with you at dawn," the elder brothers replied.
Now they had won, and they gathered their thoughts, the two of them,
about the fall of One Monkey and One Artisan:
"We'll just turn their very being around*(226) with our words. So be

Page 61 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

it, since they have caused us great suffering. They wished that we
might die and disappear- we, their younger brothers. Just as they
wished us to be slaves here,*(227) so we shall defeat them there. We
shall simply make a sign of it," they said to one another.
And then they went there beneath a tree, the kind named
yellowwood, together with the elder brothers. When they got there they
started shooting. There were countless birds up in the tree,
chittering, and the elder brothers were amazed when they saw the
birds. And not one of these birds fell down beneath the tree:
"Those birds of ours don't fall down; just go throw them down," they
told their elder brothers.
"Very well," they replied.
And then they climbed up the tree, and the tree began to grow, its
trunk got thicker.
After that, they wanted to get down, but now One Monkey and One
Artisan couldn't make it down from the tree. So they said, from up
in the tree:
"How can we grab hold?*(228) You, our younger brothers, take pity on
us! Now this tree looks frightening to us, dear younger brothers,"
they said from up in the tree. Then Hunahpu and Xbalanque told them:
"Undo your pants, tie them around your hips, with the long end
trailing like a tail behind you, and then you'll be better able to
move," they were told by their younger brothers.
"All right," they said.
And then they left the ends of their loincloths trailing, and all at
once these became tails. Now they looked like mere monkeys.
After that they went along in the trees of the mountains, small
and great. They went through the forests, now howling, now keeping
quiet in the branches of trees.
Such was the defeat of One Monkey and One Artisan by Hunahpu and
Xbalanque. They did it by means of their genius alone.
And when they got home they said, when they came to their
grandmother and mother:
"Our dear grandmother, something has happened to our elder brothers.
They've become simply shameless,*(229) they're like animals now," they
said.
"If you've done something to your elder brothers, you've knocked
me down and stood me on my head. Please don't do anything to your
elder brothers, my dear grandchildren," the grandmother said to
Hunahpu and Xbalanque. And they told their grandmother:
"Don't be sad, our dear grandmother. You will see the faces of our
elder brothers again. They'll come, but this will be a test for you,
our dear grandmother. Will you please not laugh*(230) while we test
their destiny?" they said.
And then they began playing. They played "Hunahpu Monkey."
AND THEN THEY SANG, THEY PLAYED, THEY DRUMMED. When they took up
their flutes and drums, their grandmother sat down with them, then
they played, they sounded out the tune, the song that got its name
then. "Hunahpu Monkey" is the name of the tune.

Page 62 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

And then One Monkey and One Artisan came back, dancing when they
arrived.
And then, when the grandmother looked, it was their ugly faces the
grandmother saw. Then she laughed, the grandmother could not hold back
her laughter, so they just left right away, out of her sight again,
they went up and away in the forest.
"Why are you doing that, our dear grandmother? We'll only try four
times; only three times are left. We'll call them with the flute, with
song. Please hold back your laughter. We'll try again," said Hunahpu
and Xbalanque.
Next they played again, then they came back, dancing again, they
arrived again, in the middle of the patio of the house.*(231) As
before, what they did was delightful; as before, they tempted their
grandmother to laugh. Their grandmother laughed at them soon enough.
The monkeys looked truly ridiculous, with the skinny little things
below their bellies*(232) and their tails wiggling in front of their
breasts.*(233) When they came back the grandmother had to laugh at
them, and they went back into the mountains.
"Please, why are you doing that, our dear grandmother? Even so,
we'll try it a third time now," said Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
Again they played, again they came dancing, but their grandmother
held back her laughter. Then they climbed up here, cutting right
across the building, with thin red lips,*(234) with faces blank,*(235)
puckering their lips,*(236) wiping their mouths and faces,*(237)
suddenly scratching themselves.*(238) And when the grandmother saw
them again, the grandmother burst out laughing again, and again they
went out of sight because of the grandmother's laughter.
"Even so, our dear grandmother, we'll get their attention."
So for the fourth time they called on the flute, but they didn't
come back again. The fourth time they went straight into the forest.
So they told their grandmother:
"Well, we've tried, our dear grandmother. They came at first, and
we've tried calling them again. So don't be sad. We're here- we,
your grandchildren. Just love our mother, dear grandmother. Our
elder brothers will be remembered. So be it: they have lived here
and they have been named; they are to be called One Monkey and One
Artisan," said Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
So they were prayed to by the flautists and singers among the
ancient people, and the writers and carvers prayed to them. In ancient
times they turned into animals, they became monkeys, because they just
magnified themselves, they abused their younger brothers. Just as they
wished them to be slaves, so they themselves were brought low. One
Monkey and One Artisan were lost then, they became animals, and this
is now their place forever.
Even so, they were flautists and singers; they did great things
while they lived with their grandmother and mother.
(See illustration: Drawing by the author.
SUDDENLY SCRATCHING THEMSELVES: This spider monkey was painted on
a classic Maya funerary vase from northern Guatemala. Note the

Page 63 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

dangling genitals, or what the Popol Vuh calls "the skinny little
things below their bellies." [The vase is in the collection of Edwin
Pearlman.])
AND NOW THEY BEGAN TO ACT OUT THEIR SELF-REVELATION before their
grandmother and mother. First they made a garden:
"We'll just do some gardening, our dear grandmother and mother,"
they said. "Don't worry. We're here, we're your grandchildren, we're
the successors of our elder brothers," said Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
And then they took up their axe, their mattock, their hoe;*(239)
each of them went off with a blowgun on his shoulder. They left the
house having instructed their grandmother to give them their food:
"At midday bring our food, dear grandmother," they said.
"Very well, my dear grandchildren," said their grandmother.
After that, they went to their gardening. They simply stuck their
mattock in the ground, and the mattock simply cultivated the ground.
And it wasn't only the mattock that cultivated, but also the axe. In
the same way, they stuck it in the trunk of a tree; in the same way,
it cut into the tree by itself, felling, scattering, felling all the
trees and bushes, now leveling, mowing down the trees.*(240)
Just the one axe did it, and the mattock, breaking up thick
masses, countless stalks and brambles.*(241) Just one mattock was
doing it, breaking up countless things, just clearing off whole
mountains, small and great.
And then they gave instructions to that creature named the
mourning dove. They sat up on a big stump, and Hunahpu and Xbalanque
said:
"Just watch for our grandmother, bringing our food. Cry out right
away when she comes, and then we'll grab the mattock and axe."
"Very well," said the mourning dove.
This is because all they're doing is shooting; they're not really
doing any gardening.
And as soon as the dove cries out they come running, one of them
grabbing the mattock and the other grabbing the hoe, and they're tying
up their hair.
One of them deliberately rubs dirt on his hands; he dirties his face
as well, so he's just like a real gardener.
And as for the other one, he deliberately dumps wood chips on his
head,*(242) so he's like a real woodcutter.
Once their grandmother has seen them they eat, but they aren't
really doing their gardening; she brings their food for nothing. And
when they get home:
"We're really ready for bed, our dear grandmother," they say when
they arrive. Deliberately they massage, they stretch their legs, their
arms*(243) in front of their grandmother.
And when they went on the second day and arrived at the garden, it
had all grown up high again. Every tree and bush, every stalk and
bramble had put itself back together again when they arrived.
"Who's been picking us clean?" they said.
And these are the ones who are doing it, all the animals, small

Page 64 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

and great: puma, jaguar, deer, rabbit, fox, coyote,*(244) peccary,
coati, small birds, great birds. They are the ones who did it; they
did it in just one night.
After that, they started the garden all over again. Just as
before, the ground worked itself, along with the woodcutting.
And then they shared their thoughts, there on the cleared and broken
ground:
"We'll simply have to keep watch over our garden. Then, whatever may
be happening here, we'll find out about it," they said when they
shared their thoughts. And when they arrived at the house:
"How could we get picked clean, our dear grandmother? Our garden was
tall thickets and groves all over again when we got there awhile
ago, our dear grandmother," they said to their grandmother and mother.
"So we'll go keep watch, because what's happening to us is no good,"
they said.
After that, they wound everything up, and then they went back to the
clearing.
And there they took cover, and when they were well hidden there, all
the animals gathered together, each one sat on its haunches, all the
animals, small and great.
And this was the middle of the night when they came. They all
spoke when they came. This is what they said:
"Arise, conjoin, you trees!
Arise, conjoin, you bushes!"*(245)
they said. Then they made a great stir beneath the trees and bushes,
then they came nearer, and then they showed their faces.
The first of these were the puma and jaguar. The boys tried to
grab them, but they did not give themselves up. When the deer and
rabbit came near they only got them by the tail, which just broke off:
the deer left its tail in their hands. When they grabbed the tail of
the deer, along with the tail of the rabbit, the tails were shortened.
But the fox, coyote, and peccary, coati did not give themselves up.
All the animals went by in front of Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
SO NOW THERE WAS FIRE IN THEIR HEARTS, because they didn't catch
them. And one more came, the last one now, jumping as he came, then
they cut him off. In their net they caught the rat.
And then they grabbed him and squeezed him behind the head. They
tried to choke him; they burned his tail over a fire. Ever since the
rat's tail got caught, there's been no hair on his tail, and his
eyes have been the way they are since the boys tried to choke him,
Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
"I will not die by your hand! Gardening is not your job, but there
is something that is," said the rat.
"Where is what is ours? Go ahead and name it," the boys told the
rat.
"Will you let me go then? My word is in my belly,*(246) and after
I name it for you, you'll give me my morsel of food," said the rat.
"We'll give you your food, so name it," he was told.
"Very well. It's something that belonged to your fathers, named

Page 65 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, who died in Xibalba. What remains is
their gaming equipment. They left it up under the roof of the
house:*(247) their kilts, their arm guards, their rubber ball. But
your grandmother doesn't take these down in front of you, because this
is how your fathers died."
"You know the truth, don't you!" the boys told the rat.
There was great joy in their hearts when they got word of the rubber
ball. When the rat had named it they gave the rat his food, and this
is his food: corn kernels, squash seeds, chili, beans, pataxte, cacao.
These are his.
"If anything of yours is stored or gets wasted, then gnaw away," the
rat was told by Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
"Very well, boys. But what will your grandmother say if she sees
me?"*(248) he said.
"Don't be fainthearted. We're here. We know what our grandmother
needs to be told. We'll set you up under the corner of the roof
right away. When that's taken care of you'll go straight to where
the things were left, and we'll look up there under the roof, but it's
our stew we'll be looking at," they told the rat when they gave him
his instructions.
Hunahpu and Xbalanque made their plans overnight and arrived right
at noon, and it wasn't obvious that they had a rat with them when they
arrived. One of them went right inside the house when he reached it,
while the other went to the corner of the house, quickly setting up
the rat. And then they asked their grandmother for their meal:
"Just grind something for our stew, we want chili sauce, our dear
grandmother," they said.
After that, she ground chili for their stew. A bowl of broth was set
out in front of them, but they were just fooling*(249) their
grandmother and mother. They had emptied the water jar:
"We're really parched! Bring us a drink," they told their
grandmother.
"Yes," she said, then she went, and they kept on eating. They
weren't really hungry; they just put on false appearances.
And then they saw the rat reflected in their chili sauce: here was
the rat loosening the ball*(250) that had been left in the peak of the
roof. When they saw him in the chili sauce they sent a mosquito,
that creature the mosquito, similar to a gnat. He went to the water,
then he punctured the side of the grandmother's jar. The water just
gushed out from the side of her jar. She tried, but she could not stop
up the side of her jar.
"What has our grandmother done? We're choking for lack of water, our
parched throats will do us in," they told their mother, then they sent
her there.
After that, the rat cut the ball loose. It dropped from beneath
the roof, along with the yokes, arm guards, kilts. These were taken
away*(251) then; they went to hide them on the road, the road to the
ball court.
After that, they went to join their grandmother at the water, and

Page 66 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

their grandmother and mother were unable to stop up the side of the
jar, either one of them.
After that, the boys arrived, each with his blowgun. When they
arrived at the water:
"What have you done? We got weary at heart, so we came," they said.
"Look at the side of my jar! It cannot be stopped," said their
grandmother, and they quickly stopped it up.
And they came back together, the two of them ahead of their
grandmother.
In this way, the matter of the rubber ball was arranged.
HAPPY NOW, THEY WENT TO PLAY BALL AT THE COURT. So they played
ball at a distance, all by themselves. They swept out the court of
their fathers.
And then it came into the hearing of the lords of Xibalba:
"Who's begun a game again up there, over our heads? Don't they
have any shame, stomping around this way? Didn't One and Seven Hunahpu
die trying to magnify themselves in front of us? So, you must
deliver another summons," they said as before, One and Seven Death,
all the lords.
"They are hereby summoned," they told their messengers. "You are
to say, on reaching them:
'"They must come," say the lords. "We would play ball with them
here. In seven days we'll have a game," say the lords,' you will say
when you arrive," the messengers were told.
And then they came along a wide roadway, the road to the house of
the boys, which actually ended at their house, so that the
messengers came directly to their grandmother. As for the boys, they
were away playing ball when the messengers of Xibalba got there.
"'Truly, they are to come,' say the lords," said the messengers of
Xibalba. So then and there the day was specified by the messengers
of Xibalba:
"'In seven days our game will take place,'" Xmucane was told there.
"Very well. They'll go when the day comes, messengers," said the
grandmother, and the messengers left. They went back.
So now the grandmother's heart was broken:
"How can I send for my grandchildren? Isn't it really Xibalba,
just as it was when the messengers came long ago, when their fathers
went to die?" said the grandmother, sobbing, at home by herself.
After that, a louse fell on her elbow,*(252) and then she picked
it up and put it in her hand, and the louse moved around with fits and
starts.
"My grandchild, perhaps you might like to take my message, to go
where my grandchildren are, at the ball court," the louse was told,
then he went as a message bearer:
"'A messenger has come to your grandmother,' you will say. '"You are
to come:
'In seven days they are to come,' say the messengers of Xibalba,"
says your grandmother,' you will say," the louse was told.
Then he went off, and he went in fits and starts, and sitting in the

Page 67 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

road was a boy named Tamazul, the toad.
"Where are you going?" said the toad to the louse.
"My word is contained*(253) in my belly. I'm going to the two boys,"
said the louse to Tamazul.
"Very well. But I notice you're not very fast," the louse was told
by the toad. "Wouldn't you like me to swallow you? You'll see, I'll
run bent over*(254) this way, we'll arrive in a hurry."
"Very well," said the louse to the toad.
After that, when he had been united with the toad,*(255) the toad
hopped. He went along now, but he didn't run.
After that, the toad met a big snake named Zaquicaz:
"Where are you going, Tamazul boy?" the toad was asked next by
Zaquicaz.
"I'm a messenger. My word is in my belly," the toad next said to the
snake.
"But I notice you're not fast. Listen to me, I'll get there in a
hurry," said the snake to the toad.
"Get going," he was told, so then the toad was next swallowed by
Zaquicaz. When snakes get their food today they swallow toads.
So the snake was running as he went, then the snake was met from
overhead by a laughing falcon, a large bird. The snake was swallowed
up by the falcon, and then he arrived above the court. When hawks
get their food, they eat snakes in the mountains.
And when the falcon arrived he alighted on the rim of the ball
court.*(256) Hunahpu and Xbalanque were happy then, they were
playing ball when the falcon arrived.
So then the falcon cried out:
"Wak-ko! Wak-ko!"*(257)
said the falcon as he cried.
"Who's crying out there? Come on! Our blowguns!" they said. And they
shot the falcon, landing their blowgun shot*(258) right in his eye.
Wobbling, he fell down and they went right there to grab him, then
they asked him:
"What are you after?" they said to the falcon.
"My word is contained in my belly.*(259) But heal my eye first, then
I'll name it," said the falcon.
"Very well," they said.
Next they took a bit of gum off the surface of the ball, then they
put it on the eye of the falcon. "Sorrel gum" was their name for it.
As soon as it was treated by them, the vision of the falcon became
good again.
"So name it," they said to the falcon, and then he vomited a big
snake.
"Speak up," they said next to the snake.
"Yes," he said next, then he vomited the toad.
"What's your errand? Tell it," the toad was told next.
"My word is contained in my belly," the toad said next, and then
he tried to throw up, but there was no vomit, he just sort of
drooled.*(260) He was trying, but there was no vomit.

Page 68 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

After that, he had to be kicked by the boys.
"You trickster!" he was told, then they kicked him*(261) in the
rear, and they crushed the bones*(262) of his rear end with their
feet. When he tried again, he just sort of spit.
And then they pried the toad's mouth open, it was opened by the
boys. They searched his mouth, and the louse had simply stuck in the
toad's teeth, it was right there in his mouth.*(263) He hadn't
swallowed it, but had only seemed to swallow.
And such was the defeat of the toad. It's not clear what kind of
food they gave him, and because he didn't run he became mere meat
for snakes.
"Tell it," the louse was told next, so then he named his word:
"Boys, your grandmother says:
'Summon them. A message came for them:
"From Xibalba comes the messenger of One and Seven Death:
'"In seven days they are to come here. We'll play ball. Their gaming
equipment must come along: rubber ball, yokes, arm guards, kilts. This
will make for some excitement here," say the lords,' is the word
that came from them,"' says your grandmother. So your grandmother says
you must come. Truly your grandmother cries, she calls out to you to
come."
"Isn't it the truth!" the boys said in their thoughts. When they
heard it they left at once and got to their grandmother, but they went
there only to give their grandmother instructions:
"We're on our way, dear grandmother. We're just giving you
instructions. So here is the sign of our word. We'll leave it with
you. Each of us will plant an ear of corn.*(264) We'll plant them in
the center of our house. When the corn dries up,*(265) this will be
a sign of our death:
'Perhaps they died,' you'll say, when it dries up. And when the
sprouting comes:*(266)
'Perhaps they live,' you'll say, our dear grandmother and mother.
From now on, this is the sign of our word. We're leaving it with you,"
they said, then they left.
Hunahpu planted one and Xbalanque planted another.*(267) They were
planted right there in the house: neither in the mountains nor where
the earth is damp,*(268) but where the earth is dry, in the middle
of the inside of their house.*(269) They left them planted there, then
went off, each with his own blowgun.
THEY WENT DOWN TO XIBALBA, quickly going down the face of a cliff,
and they crossed over the bottom of a canyon with rapids. They
passed right through the birds- the ones called throng birds- and then
they crossed Pus River and Blood River, intended as traps by
Xibalba. They did not step in, but simply crossed over on their
blowguns, and then they went on over to the Crossroads. But they
knew about the roads of Xibalba:*(270) Black Road, White Road, Red
Road, Green Road.
And there they summoned that creature named the mosquito. Having
heard that he's a spy, they sent him ahead:

Page 69 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

"Bite them one by one. First bite the first one seated there, then
bite every last one of them, and it will be yours alone to suck the
blood of people in the roads," the mosquito was told.
"Very well," replied the mosquito, then he took Black Road and
stopped at the two manikins, the woodcarvings, that were seated first.
They were all dressed up, and he bit the first of them. It didn't
speak, so he bit again. When he bit the one seated second, again it
didn't speak, and then he bit the third one, the one seated third
actually being One Death.
"Yeow!" each one said as he was bitten.
"What?" each one replied.
"Ouch!" said One Death.
"What is it, One Death?"
"Something's bitten me."
"It's- ouch! There's something that's bitten me," the one seated
fourth said next.
"What is it, Seven Death?"
"Something's bitten me." The one seated fifth spoke next:
"Ow! Ow!" he said.
"What, House Corner?" Seven Death said to him.
"Something's bitten me," he said next. The one seated sixth was
bitten:
"Ouch!"
"What is it, Blood Gatherer?" House Corner said to him.
"Something's bitten me," he said next. Then the one seated seventh
was bitten:
"Ouch!" he said next.
"What is it, Pus Master?" Blood Gatherer said to him.
"Something's bitten me," he said next. The one seated eighth was
bitten next:
"Ouch!" he said next.
"What is it, Jaundice Master?" Pus Master said to him next.
"Something's bitten me," he said next. Then the one seated ninth was
bitten next:
"Ouch!" he said.
"What is it, Bone Scepter?" Jaundice Master said to him.
"Something's bitten me," he said next. Then the one seated tenth
in order was bitten next:
"Ouch!"
"What is it, Skull Scepter?" said Bone Scepter.
"Something's bitten me," he said next. Then the one seated
eleventh was bitten next:
"Ouch!" he said next.
"What is it, Wing?"*(271) Skull Scepter said to him next.
"Something's bitten me," he said next. Then the one seated twelfth
was bitten next:
"Ouch!" he said next.
"What, Packstrap?" he was asked next.
"Something's bitten me," he said next. Then the one seated

Page 70 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

thirteenth was bitten next:
"Ouch!"
"What is it, Bloody Teeth?" Packstrap said to him.
"Something's bitten me," he said next. Then the one seated
fourteenth was bitten next:
"Ouch! Something's bitten me," he said next.
"Bloody Claws?" Bloody Teeth said to him next.
And such was the naming of their names, they named them all among
themselves. They showed their faces and named their names, each one
named by the one ranking above him, and naming in turn the name of the
one seated next to him.*(272) There wasn't a single name they
missed, naming every last one of their names when they were bitten
by the hair that Hunahpu had plucked from his own shin. It wasn't
really a mosquito that bit them. It went to hear all their names for
Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
After that Hunahpu and Xbalanque went on, and then they came to
where the Xibalbans were:
"Bid the lords good day," said someone who was seated there. It
was a deceiver who spoke.
"These aren't lords! These are manikins, woodcarvings!"*(273) they
said as they came up.
And after that, they bid them good morning:
"Morning, One Death. Morning, Seven Death.
Morning, House Corner. Morning, Blood Gatherer.
Morning, Pus Master. Morning, Jaundice Master.
Morning, Bone Scepter. Morning, Skull Scepter.
Morning, Wing. Morning, Packstrap.
Morning, Bloody Teeth. Morning, Bloody Claws,"
they said when they arrived, and all of their identities were
accounted for. They named every one of their names; there wasn't a
single name they missed. When this was required of them, no name was
omitted by them.
"Sit here," they were told. They were wanted on the bench, but
they didn't want it:
"This bench isn't for us! It's just a stone slab for cooking,"
said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. They were not defeated.
"Very well. Just get in the house," they were told.
And after that, they entered Dark House. They were not defeated
there. This was the first test they entered in Xibalba, and as far
as the Xibalbans were concerned they were as good as defeated.
FIRST THEY ENTERED DARK HOUSE.
And after that, the messenger of One Death brought their torch,
burning when it arrived, along with one cigar apiece.
"'Here is their torch,' says the lord. 'They must return the torch
in the morning, along with the cigars. They must return them
intact,' say the lords," the messenger said when he arrived.
"Very well," they said, but they didn't burn the torch- instead,
something that looked like fire was substituted. This was the tail
of the macaw, which looked like a torch to the sentries. And as for

Page 71 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

the cigars, they just put fireflies at the tips of those cigars, which
they kept lit all night.
"We've defeated them," said the sentries, but the torch was not
consumed- it just looked that way. And as for the cigars, there wasn't
anything burning there- it just looked that way. When these things
were taken back to the lords:
"What's happening? Where did they come from? Who begot them and bore
them? Our hearts are really hurting, because what they're doing to
us is no good. They're different in looks and different in their
very being," they said among themselves. And when they had summoned
all the lords:
"Let's play ball, boys," the boys were told. And then they were
asked by One and Seven Death:
"Where might you have come from? Please name it," Xibalba said to
them.
"Well, wherever did we come from? We don't know," was all they said.
They didn't name it.
"Very well then, we'll just go play ball, boys," Xibalba told them.
"Good," they said.
"Well, this is the one we should put in play, here's our rubber
ball," said the Xibalbans.*(274)
"No thanks. This is the one to put in, here's ours," said the boys.
"No it's not. This is the one we should put in," the Xibalbans
said again.
"Very well," said the boys.
"After all, it's just a decorated one,"*(275) said the Xibalbans.
"Oh no it's not, it's just a skull!*(276) We've said
enough,"*(277) said the boys.
"No it's not," said the Xibalbans.
"Very well," said Hunahpu. When it was sent off by Xibalba, the ball
was stopped by Hunahpu's yoke.
And then, while Xibalba watched, the White Dagger came out from
inside the ball. It went clattering, twisting all over the floor of
the court.
"What's that!" said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. "Death is the only
thing you want for us! Wasn't it you who sent a summons to us,*(278)
and wasn't it your messenger who went? Truly, take pity on us, or else
we'll just leave," the boys told them.
And this is what had been ordained for the boys: that they should
have died right away, right there, defeated by that knife. But it
wasn't like that. Instead, Xibalba was again defeated by the boys.
"Well, don't go, boys. We can still play ball, but we'll put yours
into play," the boys were told.
"Very well," they said, and this was the time for their rubber ball,
so the ball was dropped in.
And after that, they specified the prize:
"What should our prize be?" asked the Xibalbans.
"It's yours for the asking," was all the boys said.
"We'll just win four bowls of flowers," said the Xibalbans.

Page 72 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

"Very well. What kinds of flowers?" the boys asked Xibalba.
"One bowl of red petals,*(279) one bowl of white petals, one bowl of
yellow petals, and one bowl of whole ones," said the Xibalbans.
"Very well," said the boys, and then their ball was dropped in.
The boys were their equals in strength and made many plays, since they
only had very good thoughts. Then the boys gave themselves up in
defeat, and the Xibalbans were glad when they were defeated:
"We've done well. We've beaten them on the first try," said the
Xibalbans. "Where will they go to get the flowers?" they said in their
hearts.
"Truly, before the night is over, you must hand over our flowers and
our prize," the boys, Hunahpu and Xbalanque, were told by Xibalba.
"Very well. So we're also playing ball at night," they said when
they accepted their charge.
(See illustration: Drawing from Alfred M. Tozzer, Chichen
Itza and
Its Cenote of Sacrifice: photo by Hillel Burger (C) 1984 by the
President and Fellows of Harvard College.
"IT'S JUST A SKULL": In this section from the relief panels in the
ball court at Chichen Itza, the ball (at center) bears a skull
motif. Like One and Seven Hunahpu and their sons in the Popol Vuh, the
players in this scene wear kilts, yokes (the belts with objects
protruding upward from them at an angle), arm guards, panaches, and
headbands. From the mouths of the two players at left and the one at
extreme right comes speech (resembling curling smoke), probably in the
form of taunts like those the lords of Xibalba hurl at Hunahpu and
Xbalanque in a later Popol Vuh episode. The kneeling player to the
right of the ball has been decapitated; from his neck emerge
serpents and a vine with flowers and fruits. This may be a squash
vine, corresponding to the squash that was substituted for Hunahpu's
head when he lost his own to a snatch-bat.)
AND AFTER THAT, THE BOYS NEXT ENTERED RAZOR HOUSE, the second
test
of Xibalba.
And this is when it was ordained that they be cut clear through with
knives. It was intended to be quick, intended that they should die,
but they did not die. They spoke to the knives then, they instructed
them:
"This is yours: the flesh of all the animals," they told the knives,
and they no longer moved- rather, each and every knife put down its
point.
And this is how they stayed there overnight, in Razor House. Now
they summoned all the ants:
"Cutting ants, conquering ants, come now,
all of you fetch all of them for us:
flowers in bloom, prizes for lords."
"Very well," they replied. Then all the ants went to get the
flowers, the plantings of One and Seven Death, who had already given
instructions to the guardians of the flowers of Xibalba:

Page 73 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

"Would you please watch our flowers? Don't let them get stolen.
We've defeated these boys, so won't they come looking for the prize
they owe us? Don't sleep tonight."
"Very well," they replied, but the guardians of the plants never
knew a thing. Their only inclination was to stretch their mouths
wide open, going from one perch to another in the trees and plants,
repeating the same song:
"Whip-poor-will! Whip-poor-will!"
one of them says as he cries.
"Poor-willow! Poor-willow!"*(280)
says the other as he cries, the one named poorwill.
The two of them are the guards of the garden, the garden of One
and Seven Death, but they don't notice the ants stealing what's
under their guard, swarming, carrying away loads of flowers, coming to
cut down the flowers in the trees, gathering these together with the
flowers beneath the trees, while the guards just stretch their
mouths wide open, not noticing the nibbling at their own tails, the
nibbling at their own wings.*(281) The severed flowers rain down
into the gathering and bunching here below, so that four bowls of
flowers are easily filled, an acrobatic performance*(282) that lasts
till dawn.
After that the messengers, the pages, arrive:
"'They are to come,' says the lord. 'They must bring our prizes here
right away,'" the boys were told.
"Very well," they said. Having loaded up the flowers, four bowls
of them, they left and came before the lord, or lords, who received
the flowers with pained looks.
With this, the Xibalbans were defeated. The boys had sent mere ants;
in just one night the ants had taken the flowers and put them in the
bowls.
With this, all the Xibalbans looked sick, they paled*(283) at the
sight of the flowers.
After that, they summoned the flower guards:
"How did you allow our flowers to get stolen? These are our flowers!
Here! Look!" the guards were told.
"We took no notice, your lordship, though our tails are the worse
for it," they said.
And then their mouths were split wide,*(284) their payment for the
theft of what was under their guard.
Such was the defeat of One and Seven Death by Hunahpu and Xbalanque,
on account of which the whippoorwills got gaping mouths. Their
mouths gape to this day.
Now after that, when the ball was dropped in, they just played to
a tie. When they finished the game they made an arrangement with
each other:
"At dawn again," said Xibalba.
"Very well," said the boys, then they were finished.
AND NOW THEY ENTERED COLD HOUSE. There are countless drafts,
thick-falling hail*(285) inside the house, the home of cold. They

Page 74 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

diminished the cold right away by shutting it out. The cold dissipated
because of the boys. They did not die, but were alive when it dawned.
So, although Xibalba had wanted them to die there, they did not, but
were alive when it dawned. They came out when the pages arrived and
the guards left.
"Why haven't they died?" said the rulers of Xibalba. Again they were
amazed at the feats of the boys, Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
SO NEXT THEY ENTERED JAGUAR HOUSE, the jaguar-packed home of
jaguars:
"Don't eat us. There is something that should be yours," the jaguars
were told.
With that, they scattered bones before the animals.
After that, the jaguars were wrestling around there, over the bones.
"So they've made good work of them, they've eaten their very hearts.
Now that the boys have given themselves up, they've already been
transformed into skeletons," said the sentries, all of them finding it
sweet. But they hadn't died; they were well. They came out of Jaguar
House.
"What sort of people are they? Where did they come from?" said all
the Xibalbans.
SO NEXT THEY ENTERED THE MIDST OF THE FIRE, a house of fire*(286)
with only fire alone inside. They weren't burned by it, just
toasted, just simmered, so they were well when it dawned. Although
it had been ordained that they be quickly killed in there, overcome,
they weren't, and instead it was the Xibalbans who lost heart over
this.
NOW THEY WERE PUT INSIDE BAT HOUSE, with bats alone inside the
house, a house of snatch-bats, monstrous beasts, their snouts like
knives, the instruments of death. To come before these is to be
finished off at once.
When they were inside they just slept in their blowgun; they were
not bitten by the members of the household. But this is where they
gave one of themselves up because of a snatch-bat that came down, he
came along just as one of them showed himself. They did it because
it was actually what they were asking for, what they had in mind.
And all night the bats are making noise:
"Squeak! Squeak!"
they say, and they say it all night.
(See illustration: Drawing by the author.
SNATCH-BATS, MONSTROUS BEASTS: The bats of Xibalba were frequently
painted on classic Maya funerary vases of the Chama style, from
sites in the same region as the Great Abyss where Hunahpu and
Xbalanque descended into the underworld. The designs on the present
bat's wings represent plucked-out eyes, and he wears two eyes on his
collar; the scroll-like forms issuing from his mouth, with ragged
upper edges, may represent his shrieks. [The vase is in the collection
of Edwin Pearlman.])
Then it let up a little. The bats were no longer moving around. So
there, one of the boys crawled to the end of the blowgun, since

Page 75 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Xbalanque said:
"Hunahpu? Can you see how long it is till dawn?"*(287)
"Well, perhaps I should look to see how long it is," he replied.
So he kept trying to look out the muzzle of the blowgun, he tried to
see the dawn.
And then his head was taken off by a snatch-bat, leaving Hunahpu's
body still stuffed inside.
"What's going on?*(288) Hasn't it dawned?" said Xbalanque. No longer
is there any movement from Hunahpu. "What's this? Hunahpu hasn't left,
has he? What have you done?" He no longer moves; now there is only
heavy breathing.
After that, Xbalanque despaired:*(289)
"Alas!*(290) We've given it all up!" he said. And elsewhere, the
head meanwhile went rolling onto the court, in accordance with the
word of One and Seven Death, and all the Xibalbans were happy over the
head of Hunahpu.
After that, Xbalanque summoned all the animals: coati, peccary,
all the animals, small and great. It was at night, still night-time
when he asked them for their food:
"Whatever your foods are, each one of you: that's what I summoned
you for, to bring your food here," Xbalanque told them.
"Very well," they replied, then they went to get what's theirs, then
indeed they all came back.
There's the one who only brought his rotten wood.
There's the one who only brought leaves.
There's the one who only brought stones.
There's the one who only brought earth, on through the varied
foods of the animals, small and great, until the very last one
remained: the coati. He brought a squash,*(291) bumping it along
with his snout as he came.
And this became a simulated head for Hunahpu. His eyes were carved
right away, then brains came from the thinker, from the sky.*(292)
This was the Heart of Sky, Hurricane, who came down, came on down into
Bat House. The face wasn't finished any too quickly; it came out well.
His strength was just the same,*(293) he looked handsome, he spoke
just the same.
And this is when it was trying to dawn, reddening along the horizon:
"Now make the streaks, man," the possum was told.
"Yes," said the old man. When he made the streaks he made it dark
again; the old man made four streaks.
(See illustration: Drawings by Carlos A. Villacorta.
THE OLD MAN MADE FOUR STREAKS: In these drawings from the Dresden
Codex, the possum deity is shown bringing in each of the four types of
solar years. The repeated glyphs in the column to the left of each
figure give the names of the four year-beginning day names; in
Quiche the names are E or "Tooth" (upper left), Naoh or "Thought"
(upper right), I3 or "Wind" (lower left), and Queh or "Deer." Each
figure bears the patron deity of a given type of year on his back.)
"Possum is making streaks,"*(294) people say today, ever since he

Page 76 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

made the early dawn red and blue, establishing its very being.
"Isn't it good?" Hunahpu was asked.
"Good indeed," he replied. His head was as if it had every bone;
it had become like his real head.
After that, they had a talk, they made arrangements with each other:
"How about not playing ball yourself? You should just make lots of
threats,*(295) while I should be the one to take all the action,"
Xbalanque told him. After that, he gave instructions to a rabbit:
"Your place is there above the court, on top. Stay there in the
oaks,"*(296) the rabbit was told by Xbalanque, "until the ball comes
to you, then take off while I get to work," the rabbit was told. He
got his instructions while it was still dark.
After that, when it dawned, both of them were just as well as ever.
And when the ball was dropped in again, it was the head of Hunahpu
that rolled over the court:
"We've won! You're done!
Give up! You lost!"
they were told. But even so Hunahpu was shouting:
"Punt the head as a ball!" he told them.
"Well, we're not going to do them any more harm with threats," and
with this the lords of Xibalba sent off the ball and Xbalanque
received it, the ball was stopped by his yoke, then he hit it hard and
it took off, the ball passed straight out of the court, bouncing
just once, just twice, and stopping among the oaks. Then the rabbit
took off hopping, then they went off in pursuit, then all the
Xibalbans went off, shouting, shrieking, they went after the rabbit,
off went the whole of Xibalba.
After that, the boys got Hunahpu's head back. Then Xbalanque planted
the squash; this is when he went to set the squash above the court.
So the head of Hunahpu was really a head again, and the two of
them were happy again. And the others, those Xibalbans, were still
going on in search of the ball.
After that, having recovered the ball from among the oaks,*(297) the
boys cried out to them:
"Come back! Here's the ball! We've found it!" they said, so they
stopped. When the Xibalbans got back:
"Have we been seeing things?" they said. Then they began their
ball game again, and they made equal plays on both sides again.
After that, the squash was punted by Xbalanque. The squash was
wearing out;*(298) it fell on the court, bringing to light its
light-colored seeds, as plain as day*(299) right in front of them.
"How did you get ahold of that? Where did it come from?" said
Xibalba.
With this, the masters of Xibalba were defeated by Hunahpu and
Xbalanque. There was great danger there, but they did not die from all
the things that were done to them.
AND HERE IT IS: THE EPITAPH, THE DEATH OF HUNAHPU AND
XBALANQUE.
Here it is: now we shall name their epitaph, their death. They did

Page 77 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

whatever they were instructed to do, going through all the dangers,
the troubles that were made for them, but they did not die from the
tests of Xibalba, nor were they defeated by all the voracious
animals that inhabit Xibalba.
After that, they summoned two midmost seers, similar to readers.
Here are their names: Xulu, Pacam, both knowers.
"Perhaps there will be questions from the lords of Xibalba about our
death. They are thinking about how to overcome us because we haven't
died, nor have we been defeated. We've exhausted all their tests.
Not even the animals got us. So this is the sign, here in our
hearts: their instrument for our death will be a stone oven. All the
Xibalbans have gathered together. Isn't our death inevitable? So
this is your plan, here we shall name it: if you come to be questioned
by them about our death, once we've been burned, what will you say,
Xulu and Pacam? If they ask you:
'Wouldn't it be good if we dumped their bones in the canyon?'*(300)
'Perhaps it wouldn't be good, since they would only come back to
life again,' you will say.
'Perhaps this would be good: we'll just hang them up in a tree,'
they'll say to you next.
'Certainly that's no good, since you would see their faces,'*(301)
you will say, and then they'll speak to you for the third time:
'Well, here's the only good thing: we'll just dump their bones in
the river.' If that's what they ask you next:
'This is a good death for them, and it would also be good to grind
their bones on a stone, just as corn is refined into flour, and refine
each of them separately, and then:
Spill them into the river,
sprinkle them*(302) on the water's way,
among the mountains, small and great,'
you will say, and then you will have carried out the instructions
we've named for you," said Hunahpu and Xbalanque. When they gave these
instructions they already knew they would die.
THIS IS THE MAKING OF THE OVEN, the great stone oven. The
Xibalbans made it like the places where the sweet drink is cooked,
they opened it to a great width.
After that, messengers came to get the boys, the messengers of One
and Seven Death:
"'They must come. We'll go with the boys, to see the treat we've
cooked up for them,' say the lords, you boys," they were told.
"Very well," they replied. They went running and arrived at the
mouth of the oven.
And there they tried to force them into a game:
"Here, let's jump over our drink four times, clear across, one of us
after the other, boys," they were told by One Death.
"You'll never put that one over on us.*(303) Don't we know what
our death is, you lords? Watch!" they said, then they faced each
other. They grabbed each other by the arms and went head first into
the oven.*(304)

Page 78 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

And there they died, together, and now all the Xibalbans were happy,
raising their shouts, raising their cheers:*(305)
"We've really beaten them! They didn't give up easily," they said.
After that they summoned Xulu and Pacam, who kept their word: the
bones went just where the boys had wanted them. Once the Xibalbans had
done the divination, the bones were ground and spilled in the river,
but they didn't go far- they just sank to the bottom of the water.
They became handsome boys; they looked just the same as before when
they reappeared.
AND ON THE FIFTH DAY THEY REAPPEARED. They were seen in the water by
the people. The two of them looked like channel catfish*(306) when
their faces were seen by Xibalba. And having germinated in the waters,
they appeared the day after that as two vagabonds,*(307) with rags
before and rags behind, and rags all over too. They seemed
unrefined*(308) when they were examined by Xibalba; they acted
differently now.
It was only the Dance of the Poorwill, the Dance of the Weasel, only
Armadillos they danced.
Only Swallowing Swords, only Walking on Stilts now they danced.
They performed many miracles now. They would set fire to a house, as
if they were really burning it, and suddenly bring it back again.
Now Xibalba was full of admiration.*(309)
Next they would sacrifice themselves, one of them dying for the
other,*(310) stretched out as if in death. First they would kill
themselves, but then they would suddenly look alive again. The
Xibalbans could only admire what they did. Everything they did now was
already the groundwork for their defeat of Xibalba.
(See illustration: Drawing by the author.
ONLY ARMADILLOS THEY DANCED: This dancer, who wears an armadillo
mask, plays a flute, and shakes a rattle, was painted on a classic
Maya funerary vase of the Chama style, which pertains to sites in
the same general region as the Great Abyss where Hunahpu and Xbalanque
descended into the underworld. The cross-hatching represents the
scales of an armadillo.)
And after that, news of their dances came to the ears of the
lords, One and Seven Death. When they heard it they said:
"Who are these two vagabonds? Are they really such a delight? And is
their dancing really that pretty? They do everything!" they said. An
account of them had reached the lords. It sounded delightful, so
then they entreated their messengers to notify them that they must
come:
"'"If only they'd come make a show for us, we'd wonder at them and
marvel at them," say the lords,' you will say," the messengers were
told. So they came to the dancers, then spoke the words of the lords
to them.
"But we don't want to, because we're really ashamed. Just plain
no. Wouldn't we be afraid to go inside there, into a lordly house?
Because we'd really look bad. Wouldn't we just be wide-eyed? Take pity
on us! Wouldn't we look like mere dancers to them? What would we say

Page 79 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

to our fellow vagabonds? There are others who also want us to dance
today, to liven things up with us, so we can't do likewise for the
lords, and likewise is not what we want, messengers," said Hunahpu and
Xbalanque.
Even so, they were prevailed upon: through troubles, through
torments, they went on their tortuous way. They didn't want to walk
fast. Many times they had to be forced; the messengers went ahead of
them as guides but had to keep coming back.*(311) And so they went
to the lord.
AND THEY CAME TO THE LORDS. Feigning great humility,*(312) they
bowed their heads all the way to the ground*(313) when they arrived.
They brought themselves low, doubled over, flattened out, down to
the rags, to the tatters.*(314) They really looked like vagabonds when
they arrived.
So then they were asked what their mountain*(315) and tribe were,
and they were also asked about their mother and father:
"Where do you come from?" they were asked.
"We've never known, lord. We don't know the identity of our mother
and father. We must've been small when they died," was all they
said. They didn't give any names.
"Very well. Please entertain us, then. What do you want us to give
you in payment?" they were asked.
"Well, we don't want anything. To tell the truth, we're afraid,"
they told the lord.
"Don't be afraid. Don't be ashamed. Just dance this way: first
you'll dance to sacrifice yourselves, you'll set fire to my house
after that, you'll act out all the things you know. We want to be
entertained. This is our heart's desire, the reason you had to be sent
for, dear vagabonds. We'll give you payment," they were told.
So then they began their songs and dances, and then all the
Xibalbans arrived, the spectators crowded the floor, and they danced
everything: they danced the Weasel, they danced the Poorwill, they
danced the Armadillo. Then the lord said to them:
"Sacrifice my dog, then bring him back to life again," they were
told.
"Yes," they said.
When they sacrificed the dog
he then came back to life.
And that dog was really happy
when he came back to life.
Back and forth he wagged his tail
when he came back to life.
And the lord said to them:
"Well, you have yet to set my home on fire," they were told next, so
then they set fire to the home of the lord. The house was packed
with all the lords, but they were not burned. They quickly fixed it
back again, lest the house of One Death be consumed all at once, and
all the lords were amazed, and they went on dancing this way. They
were overjoyed.

Page 80 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

And then they were asked by the lord:
"You have yet to kill a person! Make a sacrifice without death!"
they were told.
"Very well," they said.
And then they took hold of a human sacrifice.
And they held up a human heart on high.
And they showed its roundness*(316) to the lords.
(See illustration: Drawing reproduced by permission of
Michael D.
Coe and the Grolier Club.
AND THEN THEY TOOK HOLD OF A HUMAN SACRIFICE: In this classic Maya
funerary vase painting from northern Guatemala, the head lord of
Xibalba, One Death, is seated on his throne at right; perched on his
hat is one of the messengers of Xibalba, Macaw Owl, who is like an owl
except in having the tail of a macaw. In front of One Death are
Hunahpu (left) and Xbalanque (right), acting out the roles of
sacrificial priests; Xbalanque's identity is marked by the jaguar
paw on the nose of his mask. The women around the platform are all
of noble rank; the one at extreme left is tapping the foot of the
one who faces One Death, calling her attention to the sacrificial
performance. [The vase is in the Princeton University Art Museum.])
And now One and Seven Death admired it, and now that person was
brought right back to life. His heart was overjoyed when he came
back to life, and the lords were amazed:
"Sacrifice yet again, even do it to yourselves! Let's see it! At
heart, that's the dance we really want from you," the lords said now.
"Very well, lord," they replied, and then they sacrificed
themselves.
AND THIS IS THE SACRIFICE OF HUNAHPU BY XBALANQUE. One by one his
legs, his arms were spread wide.*(317) His head came off, rolled far
away outside. His heart, dug out, was smothered in a leaf,*(318) and
all the Xibalbans went crazy at the sight.
So now, only one of them was dancing there: Xbalanque.
"Get up!" he said, and Hunahpu came back to life. The two of them
were overjoyed at this- and likewise the lords rejoiced, as if they
were doing it themselves. One and Seven Death were as glad at heart as
if they themselves were actually doing the dance.
(See illustration: Drawing reproduced by permission of
Michael D.
Coe and the Grolier Club.
"SACRIFICE YET AGAIN, EVEN DO IT TO YOURSELVES!": This classic
Maya funerary vase painting from the lowlands shows Hunahpu (at
extreme left) about to swing the stone axe in his right hand and
decapitate his brother Xbalanque, while an ecstatic lord of Xibalba
(in skeletal form) looks on. The dog at right is doubtless the one
already sacrificed and brought back to life earlier in this same
episode. The insect above the dog holds a torch and may be one of
the fireflies with which Hunahpu and Xbalanque made their cigars
appear to be burning while they spent the night in Dark House, in an

Page 81 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

earlier episode. In the present scene Hunahpu is identifiable, in
part, by the catfish barbel that emerges just behind his nostril; he
acquired this attribute in a previous episode, when he and Xbalanque
appeared as channel catfish after their ground bones had been thrown
in water. Xbalanque, whose name is partly derived from balam or
"jaguar," is identifiable from his jaguar ears, paws, feet, and
tail. [This vase can be seen at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.])
And then the hearts of the lords were filled with longing, with
yearning for the dance of Hunahpu and Xbalanque, so then came these
words from One and Seven Death:
"Do it to us! Sacrifice us!"*(319) they said. "Sacrifice both of
us!" said One and Seven Death to Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
"Very well. You ought to come back to life. After all, aren't you
Death?*(320) And aren't we making you happy, along with the vassals of
your domain?" they told the lords.
And this one was the first to be sacrificed: the lord at the very
top, the one whose name is One Death, the ruler of Xibalba.
And with One Death dead, the next to be taken was Seven Death.
They did not come back to life.
And then the Xibalbans were getting up to leave, those who had
seen the lords die. They underwent heart sacrifice*(321) there, and
the heart sacrifice was performed on the two lords only for the
purpose of destroying them.
As soon as they had killed the one lord without bringing him back to
life, the other lord had been meek and tearful before the dancers.
He didn't consent, he didn't accept it:
"Take pity on me!" he said when he realized. All their vassals
took the road to the great canyon, in one single mass they filled up
the deep abyss. So they piled up there and gathered together,
countless ants,*(322) tumbling down into the canyon, as if they were
being herded there. And when they arrived, they all bent low in
surrender, they arrived meek and tearful.
Such was the defeat of the rulers of Xibalba. The boys
accomplished it only through wonders, only through
self-transformation.
AND THEN THEY NAMED THEIR NAMES, they gave themselves names before
all of Xibalba:
"Listen: we shall name our names, and we shall also name the names
of our fathers for you. Here we are: we are Hunahpu and Xbalanque by
name. And these are our fathers, the ones you killed: One Hunahpu
and Seven Hunahpu by name. And we are here to clear the road of the
torments and troubles of our fathers. And so we have suffered all
the troubles you've caused us. And so we are putting an end to all
of you. We're going to kill you. No one can save you now," they were
told. And then all the Xibalbans got down on the ground and cried out:
"Take pity on us, Hunahpu and Xbalanque! It is true that we
wronged your fathers, the ones you name. Those two are buried at the
Place of Ball Game Sacrifice," they replied.
"Very well. Now this is our word, we shall name it for you. All of

Page 82 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

you listen, you Xibalbans: because of this, your day and your
descendants will not be great. Moreover, the gifts you receive will no
longer be great, but reduced to scabrous nodules of sap. There will be
no cleanly blotted blood for you,*(323) just griddles, just gourds,
just brittle things broken to pieces.*(324) Further, you will only
feed on creatures of the meadows and clearings. None of those who
are born in the light, begotten in the light*(325) will be yours. Only
the worthless will yield themselves up before you. These will be the
guilty, the violent, the wretched, the afflicted. Wherever the blame
is clear,*(326) that is where you will come in, rather than just
making sudden attacks on people in general. And you will hear
petitions over headed-up sap,"*(327) all the Xibalbans were told.
Such was the beginning of their disappearance and the denial of
their worship.
Their ancient day was not a great one,
these ancient people only wanted conflict,
their ancient names are not really divine,
but fearful is the ancient evil of their faces.
They are makers of enemies, users of owls,
they are inciters to wrongs and violence,*(328)
they are masters of hidden intentions as well,
they are black and white,
masters of stupidity, masters of perplexity,*(329)
as it is said. By putting on appearances they cause dismay.
Such was the loss of their greatness and brilliance. Their domain
did not return to greatness. This was accomplished by Hunahpu and
Xbalanque.
AND THIS IS THEIR GRANDMOTHER, CRYING AND CALLING OUT*(330) IN
FRONT
OF THE CORN EARS they left planted.*(331) Corn plants grew, then dried
up.
And this was when they were burned in the oven; then the corn plants
grew again.
And this was when their grandmother burned something,*(332) she
burned copal before the corn as a memorial to them. There was
happiness in their grandmother's heart the second time the corn plants
sprouted. Then the ears were deified by their grandmother,*(333) and
she gave them names: Middle of the House, Middle of the Harvest,
Living Corn, Earthen Floor became their names.
And she named the ears Middle of the House, Middle of the Harvest,
because they had planted them right in the middle of the inside of
their home.
And she further named them Earthen Floor, Living Corn, since the
corn ears had been placed up above an earthen floor.*(334)
And she also named them Living Corn, because the corn plants had
grown again. So they were named by Xmucane. They had been left behind,
planted by Hunahpu and Xbalanque, simply as a way for their
grandmother to remember them.
And the first to die, a long time before, had been their fathers,

Page 83 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu. And they saw the face of their
father*(335) again, there in Xibalba. Their father spoke to them again
when they had defeated Xibalba.
AND HERE THEIR FATHER IS PUT BACK TOGETHER BY THEM. They put
Seven
Hunahpu back together; they went to the Place of Ball Game Sacrifice
to put him together. He had wanted his face to become just as it
was, but when he was asked to name everything,*(336) and once he had
found the name of the mouth, the nose, the eyes of his face, there was
very little else to be said. Although his mouth could not name the
names of each of his former parts,*(337) he had at least spoken again.
And so it remained that they were respectful of their father's
heart, even though they left him at the Place of Ball Game Sacrifice:
"You will be prayed to here,"*(338) his sons told him, and his heart
was comforted. "You will be the first resort, and you will be the
first to have your day kept*(339) by those who will be born in the
light, begotten in the light. Your name will not be lost.*(340) So
be it," they told their father when they comforted his heart.
"We merely cleared the road of your death, your loss, the pain,
the suffering that were inflicted upon you."
And such was the instruction they gave when all the Xibalbans had
been finally defeated. And then the two boys ascended this way, here
into the middle of the light, and they ascended straight on into the
sky, and the sun belongs to one and the moon to the other.*(341)
When it became light within the sky, on the face of the earth, they
were there in the sky.
And this was also the ascent of the Four Hundred Boys killed by
Zipacna.
And these came to accompany the two of them. They became the sky's
own stars.*(342)
PART_FOUR
PART FOUR
AND HERE IS THE BEGINNING OF THE CONCEPTION OF HUMANS, and of
the
search for the ingredients of the human body. So they spoke, the
Bearer, Begetter, the Makers, Modelers named Sovereign Plumed Serpent:
"The dawn has approached, preparations have been made, and morning
has come for the provider, nurturer, born in the light, begotten in
the light. Morning has come for humankind, for the people of the
face of the earth," they said. It all came together as they went on
thinking in the darkness, in the night, as they searched and they
sifted, they thought and they wondered.
And here their thoughts came out in clear light. They sought and
discovered*(343) what was needed for human flesh. It was only a
short while before the sun, moon, and stars were to appear above the
Makers and Modelers. Broken Place, Bitter Water Place is the name: the
yellow corn, white corn came from there.
And these are the names of the animals who brought the food:*(344)

Page 84 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

fox, coyote, parrot, crow. There were four animals who brought the
news of the ears of yellow corn and white corn. They were coming
from over there at Broken Place, they showed the way to the break.
And this was when they found the staple foods.
And these were the ingredients for the flesh of the human work,
the human design, and the water was for the blood. It became human
blood, and corn was also used by the Bearer, Begetter.
And so they were happy over the provisions of the good mountain,
filled with sweet things, thick with yellow corn, white corn, and
thick with pataxte and cacao, countless zapotes, anonas, jocotes,
nances, matasanos, sweets- the rich foods filling up the citadel named
Broken Place, Bitter Water Place. All the edible fruits were there:
small staples, great staples, small plants, great plants. The way
was shown by the animals.
And then the yellow corn and white corn were ground, and Xmucane did
the grinding nine times.*(345) Corn was used, along with the water she
rinsed her hands with,*(346) for the creation of grease; it became
human fat when it was worked by the Bearer, Begetter, Sovereign Plumed
Serpent, as they are called.
After that, they put it into words:
the making, the modeling of our first mother-father,
with yellow corn, white corn alone for the flesh,*(347)
food alone for the human legs and arms,
for our first fathers, the four human works.
It was staples alone that made up their flesh.
THESE ARE THE NAMES OF THE FIRST PEOPLE WHO WERE MADE AND
MODELED.
This is the first person: Jaguar Quitze.
And now the second: Jaguar Night.
And now the third: Mahucutah.
And the fourth: True Jaguar.
And these are the names of our first mother-fathers. They were
simply made and modeled, it is said; they had no mother and no father.
We have named the men by themselves. No woman gave birth to them,
nor were they begotten by the builder, sculptor, Bearer, Begetter.
By sacrifice alone, by genius alone they were made, they were
modeled by the Maker, Modeler, Bearer, Begetter, Sovereign Plumed
Serpent. And when they came to fruition, they came out human:
They talked and they made words.
They looked and they listened.
They walked, they worked.*(348)
They were good people, handsome, with looks of the male kind.
Thoughts came into existence and they gazed; their vision came all
at once. Perfectly they saw, perfectly they knew everything under
the sky, whenever they looked. The moment they turned around and
looked around in the sky, on the earth, everything was seen without
any obstruction. They didn't have to walk around before they could see
what was under the sky; they just stayed where they were.
As they looked, their knowledge became intense. Their sight passed

Page 85 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

through trees, through rocks, through lakes, through seas, through
mountains, through plains. Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and
True Jaguar were truly gifted people.
And then they were asked by the builder and mason:
"What do you know about your being? Don't you look, don't you
listen? Isn't your speech good, and your walk? So you must look, to
see out under the sky. Don't you see the mountain-plain clearly? So
try it," they were told.
And then they saw everything under the sky perfectly. After that,
they thanked the Maker, Modeler:
"Truly now,
double thanks, triple thanks
that we've been formed, we've been given
our mouths, our faces,
we speak, we listen,
we wonder, we move,
our knowledge is good, we've understood
what is far and near,
and we've seen what is great and small
under the sky, on the earth.
Thanks to you we've been formed,
we've come to be made and modeled,
our grandmother, our grandfather,"
they said when they gave thanks for having been made and modeled. They
understood everything perfectly, they sighted the four sides, the four
corners in the sky, on the earth, and this didn't sound good to the
builder and sculptor:
"What our works and designs have said is no good:
'We have understood everything, great and small,' they say." And
so the Bearer, Begetter took back their knowledge:
"What should we do with them now? Their vision should at least reach
nearby, they should see at least a small part of the face of the
earth, but what they're saying isn't good. Aren't they merely
'works' and 'designs' in their very names? Yet they'll become as great
as gods, unless they procreate, proliferate at the sowing, the
dawning, unless they increase."
"Let it be this way: now we'll take them apart just a little, that's
what we need. What we've found out isn't good. Their deeds would
become equal to ours, just because their knowledge reaches so far.
They see everything," so said
the Heart of Sky, Hurricane,
Newborn Thunderbolt, Raw Thunderbolt,
Sovereign Plumed Serpent,
Bearer, Begetter,
Xpiyacoc, Xmucane,
Maker, Modeler,
as they are called. And when they changed the nature of their works,
their designs, it was enough that the eyes be marred by the Heart of
Sky. They were blinded as the face of a mirror is breathed upon. Their

Page 86 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

eyes were weakened. Now it was only when they looked nearby that
things were clear.
And such was the loss of the means of understanding, along with
the means of knowing everything, by the four humans. The root was
implanted.
And such was the making, modeling of our first grandfather, our
father, by the Heart of Sky, Heart of Earth.
AND THEN THEIR WIVES AND WOMEN CAME INTO BEING. Again, the same
gods
thought of it. It was as if they were asleep*(349) when they
received them, truly beautiful women were there with Jaguar Quitze,
Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar. With their women there
they became wider awake. Right away they were happy at heart again,
because of their wives.
Celebrated Seahouse is the name of the wife of Jaguar Quitze.
Prawn House is the name of the wife of Jaguar Night.
Hummingbird House is the name of the wife of Mahucutah.
Macaw House is the name of the wife of True Jaguar.
So these are the names of their wives, who became ladies of
rank,*(350) giving birth to the people of the tribes, small and great.
AND THIS IS OUR ROOT, WE WHO ARE THE QUICHE PEOPLE. And there
came
to be a crowd of penitents and sacrificers.*(351) It wasn't only
four who came into being then, but there were four mothers for us, the
Quiche people. There were different names for each of the peoples when
they multiplied, there in the east. Their names became numerous:
Sovereign Oloman, Cohah, Quenech Ahau, as the names of the people
who were there in the east are spoken. They multiplied, and it is
known that the Tams and Ilocs began then. They came from the same
place, there in the east.
Jaguar Quitze was the grandfather and father of the nine great
houses of the Cauecs.
Jaguar Night was the grandfather and father of the nine great houses
of the Greathouses.
Mahucutah was the grandfather and father of the four great houses of
the Lord Quiches.
There were three separate lineages. The names of the grandfathers
and fathers are not forgotten. These multiplied and flowered there
in the east, but the Tams and Ilocs also came forth, along with
thirteen allied tribes, thirteen principalities,*(352) including:
The Rabinals, Cakchiquels, those of the Bird House.
And the White Cornmeals.
And also the Lamacs, Serpents, Sweatbath House, Talk House, those of
the Star House.
And those of the Quiba House, those of the Yokes House, Acul people,
Jaguar House, Guardians of the Spoils, Jaguar Ropes.
It is sufficient that we speak only of the largest tribes from among
the allied tribes; we have only noted the largest. Many more came
out afterward, each one a division of that citadel.*(353) We haven't

Page 87 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

written their names, but they multiplied there, from out of the
east. There came to be many peoples in the blackness; they began to
abound even before the birth of the sun and the light. When they began
to abound they were all there together; they stood and walked in
crowds, there in the east.
There was nothing they could offer for sustenance, but even so
they lifted their faces to the sky. They didn't know where they were
going. They did this for a long time, when they were there in the
grasslands: black people, white people, people of many faces, people
of many languages, uncertain, there at the edge of the sky.
And there were mountain people.*(354) They didn't show their
faces, they had no homes. They just traveled the mountains, small
and great. "It's as if they were crazy," they used to say. They
derided the mountain people, it was said. There they watched for the
sunrise, and for all the mountain people there was just one
language.*(355) They did not yet pray to wood and stone.*(356)
These are the words with which they remembered the Maker, Modeler,
Heart of Sky, Heart of Earth. It was said that these were enough to
keep them mindful of what was in shadow and what was dawning. All they
did was ask; they had reverent words. They were reverent, they were
givers of praise, givers of respect, lifting their faces to the
sky*(357) when they made requests for their daughters and sons:
"Wait!
thou Maker, thou Modeler,
look at us, listen to us,
don't let us fall, don't leave us aside,
thou god in the sky, on the earth,
Heart of Sky, Heart of Earth,
give us our sign, our word,
as long as there is day, as long as there is light.*(358)
When it comes to the sowing, the dawning,
will it be*(359) a greening road, a greening path?
Give us a steady light, a level place,
a good light, a good place,
a good life and beginning.*(360)
Give us all of this, thou Hurricane,
Newborn Thunderbolt, Raw Thunderbolt,
Newborn Nanahuac, Raw Nanahuac,
Falcon, Hunahpu,
Sovereign Plumed Serpent,
Bearer, Begetter,
Xpiyacoc, Xmucane,
Grandmother of Day, Grandmother of Light,
when it comes to the sowing, the dawning,"
they said when they made their fasts*(361) and prayers, just
watching intently*(362) for the dawn. There, too, they looked toward
the east, watching closely for the daybringer, the great star at the
birth of the sun, of the heat for what is under the sky, on the earth,
the guide for the human work, the human design.

Page 88 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

They spoke, those who are Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah,
and True Jaguar:
"We're still waiting for the dawning," they said, these great
knowers, great thinkers, penitents, praisers, as they are called.
And there was nothing of wood and stone in the keeping of our first
mother-fathers, and they were weary at heart there, waiting for the
sun. Already there were many of them, all the tribes, including the
Yaqui people, all penitents and sacrificers.
"Let's just go. We'll look and see whether there is something to
keep as our sign. We'll find out what we should burn in front of it.
The way we are right now, we have nothing to keep as our own," said
Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar. They got word
of a citadel. They went there.
AND THIS IS THE NAME OF THE MOUNTAIN WHERE THEY WENT, Jaguar
Quitze,
Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, True Jaguar, and the Tams and Ilocs: Tulan
Zuyua, Seven Caves, Seven Canyons is the name of the citadel. Those
who were to receive the gods arrived there.
And they arrived there at Tulan, all of them, countless people
arrived, walking in crowds, and their gods were given out in order,
the first being those of Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and
True Jaguar. They were happy:
"We have found what we were looking for," they said. And this one
was the first to come out:
Tohil is the name of the god loaded in the backpack borne by
Jaguar Quitze. And the others came out in turn:
Auilix is the name of the god that Jaguar Night carried.
Hacauitz, in turn, is the name of the god received by Mahucutah.
Middle of the Plain is the name of the god received by True Jaguar.
And there were still other Quiche people, since the Tams also
received theirs, but it was the same Tohil for the Tams, that's the
name received by the grandfather and father of the Tam lords, as
they are known today.
And third were the Ilocs: again, Tohil is the name of the god
received by the grandfather and father of those lords, the same ones
known today.
And such was the naming of the three Quiches. They have never let go
of each other because the god has just one name: Tohil for the
Quiche proper, and Tohil for the Tams and Ilocs. There is just one
name for their god, and so the Quiche threesome has not come apart,
those three. Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz are truly great in their very
being.
And then all the tribes came in: Rabinals, Cakchiquels, those of the
Bird House, along with the Yaqui people, as the names are today. And
the languages of the tribes changed there; their languages became
differentiated. They could no longer understand one another clearly
when they came away from Tulan.
And there they broke apart. There were those who went eastward and
many who came here, but they were all alike in dressing with hides.

Page 89 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

There were no clothes of the better kinds. They were in patches,
they were adorned with mere animal hides. They were poor. They had
nothing of their own. But they were people of genius in their very
being when they came away from Tulan Zuyua, Seven Caves, Seven
Canyons, so says the Ancient Word.
THEY WALKED IN CROWDS WHEN THEY ARRIVED AT TULAN, AND THERE
WAS NO
FIRE. Only those with Tohil had it: this was the tribe whose god was
first to generate fire. How it was generated is not clear. Their
fire was already burning when Jaguar Quitze and Jaguar Night first saw
it:
"Alas! Fire has not yet become ours. We'll die from the cold,"
they said. And then Tohil spoke:
"Do not grieve. You will have your own even when the fire you're
talking about has been lost," Tohil told them.
"Aren't you a true god!
Our sustenance and our support!
Our god!"
they said when they gave thanks for what Tohil had said.
"Very well, in truth,
I am your god: so be it.
I am your lord: so be it,"
the penitents and sacrificers were told by Tohil.
And this was the warming of the tribes. They were pleased by their
fire.
After that a great downpour began, which cut short the fire of the
tribes. And hail fell thickly on all the tribes, and their fires
were put out by the hail. Their fires didn't start up again. So then
Jaguar Quitze and Jaguar Night asked for their fire again:
"Tohil, we'll be finished off by the cold," they told Tohil.
"Well, do not grieve," said Tohil. Then he started a fire. He
pivoted inside his sandal.*(363)
After that, Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True
Jaguar were pleased.
After they had been warmed, the fires of the other tribes were still
out. Now they were being finished off by the cold, so they came back
to ask for their fire from Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and
True Jaguar. They could bear the cold and hail no longer. By now
they were chattering and shivering. There was no life left in them.
Their legs and arms kept shaking. Their hands were stiff when they
arrived.
"Perhaps we wouldn't make ourselves ashamed in front of you if we
asked to remove a little something from your fire?" they said when
they arrived, but they got no response.*(364) And then the tribes
cursed in their thoughts. Already their language had become
different from that of Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and
True Jaguar.
"Alas! We left our language behind. How did we do it? We're lost!
Where were we deceived? We had only one language when we came to

Page 90 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Tulan, and we had only one place of emergence*(365) and origin. We
haven't done well," said all the tribes beneath the trees and bushes.
And then a person showed himself*(366) before Jaguar Quitze,
Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar, and he spoke as a
messenger of Xibalba:
"Truly, since you have your god, your nurturer, and he is the
representation,*(367) the commemoration of your Maker and your
Modeler, don't give the tribes their fire until they give something to
Tohil. You don't want them to give anything to you. You must ask for
what belongs to Tohil; to him must come what they give in order to get
fire," said the Xibalban. He had wings like the wings of a bat.
"I am a messenger of those who made you and modeled you," said the
Xibalban. So now they were happy; now they thought all the more of
Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz. When the Xibalban had spoken he made
himself vanish right in front of them, without delay.
And so again the tribes arrived, again done in by the cold. Thick
were the white hail, the blackening storm, and the white crystals. The
cold was incalculable. They were simply overwhelmed.*(368) Because
of the cold all the tribes were going along doubled over, groping
along*(369) when they arrived in the presence of Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar
Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar. There was great pain in their
hearts; they had covetous mouths and covetous faces.*(370)
And now they were coming as thieves before Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar
Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar:
"Wouldn't you take pity on us if we asked to remove a little
something from your fire? Wasn't it found and wasn't it revealed*(371)
that we had just one home and just one mountain when you were made,
when you were modeled? So please take pity on us," they said.
"And what would you give us for taking pity on you?" they were
asked.
"Well, we'd give you metal," said the tribes.
"We don't want metal," said Jaguar Quitze and Jaguar Night.
"Whatever might you want, if we may ask?" the tribes said then.
"Very well. First we must ask Tohil, and then we'll tell you,"
they were told next. And then they asked Tohil:
"What should the tribes give you, Tohil? They've come to ask for
your fire," said Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True
Jaguar.
"Very well. You will tell them:
'"Don't they want to be suckled*(372) on their sides and under their
arms? Isn't it their heart's desire to embrace me? I, who am Tohil?
But if there is no desire, then I'll not give them their fire," says
Tohil. "When the time comes, not right now, they'll be suckled on
their sides, under their arms," he says to you,' you will say," they
were told, Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar,
and then they spoke the word of Tohil.
"Very well. Let him suckle. And very well, we shall embrace him,"
said the tribes, when they answered and agreed to the word of Tohil.
They made no delay*(373) but said "very well" right away, and then

Page 91 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

they received their fire.
After that they got warm, but there was one group that simply
stole the fire, there in the smoke. This was the Bat House. Calm Snake
is the name of the god of the Cakchiquels, but it looks like a bat.
They went right past in the smoke then, they sneaked past when they
came to get fire. The Cakchiquels didn't ask for their fire. They
didn't give themselves up in defeat, but all the other tribes were
defeated when they gave themselves up to being suckled on their sides,
under their arms.
And this is what Tohil meant by being "suckled": that all the tribes
be cut open before him, and that their hearts be removed "through
their sides, under their arms." This deed had not yet been
attempted*(374) when Tohil saw into the middle of it, nor had Jaguar
Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar received fiery
splendor and majesty.
(See illustration: Drawing by the author.
"THEY'VE COME TO ASK FOR YOUR FIRE": This is a scepter held by a
ruler, one of the forms taken by Tahil, the classic Maya antecedent of
Tohil. On his forehead he wears an obsidian mirror with a burning
torch emerging from it. Sometimes he is shown with a body of human
form, except that one leg is a serpent; only his head and the
serpent leg are shown here. The drawing is reconstructed from
several stucco reliefs at Palenque.)
WHEN THEY CAME AWAY FROM TULAN ZUYUA, they weren't eating. They
observed a continuous fast. It was enough that they watch intently for
the dawning, that they watch closely for the rising of the sun, taking
turns at watching for the great star named daybringer. This one came
first before the sun when the sun was born, the new daybringer.*(375)
And there, always, they were facing the east, when they were there
in the place named Tulan Zuyua. Their gods came from there. It
wasn't really here that they received their fiery splendor and their
dominion, but rather there that the tribes, great and small, were
subjugated and humiliated. When they were cut open before Tohil, all
the peoples gave their blood, their gore, their sides, their
underarms. Fiery splendor came to them all at once at Tulan, along
with great knowledge, and they achieved this in the darkness, in the
night.
And now they came away, they tore themselves away from there. Now
they left the east:*(376)
"Our home is not here. Let's go on until we see where we
belong,"*(377) said Tohil. He actually spoke to them, to Jaguar
Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar.
"It remains for you to give thanks, since you have yet to take
care of bleeding your ears and passing a cord through your
elbows.*(378) You must worship. This is your way of giving thanks
before your god."
"Very well," they replied, then they bled their ears. They cried
in their song about coming from Tulan. They cried in their hearts when
they came away, when they made their departure from Tulan:

Page 92 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

"Alas! We won't be here when we see the dawn,
when the sun is born, when the face of the earth is lit,"
they said.
AND THEN THEY CAME AWAY, JUST CAMPING ON THE ROAD.*(379) People
were
just camping there, each tribe slept and then got up again. And they
were always watching for the star, the sign of the day. They kept this
sign of the dawn in their hearts when they came away from the east. In
unity*(380) they passed beyond the place named Great Abyss today.
And then they arrived on top of a mountain there. All the Quiche
people got together there, along with the other tribes, and all of
them held council there. The name the mountain has today is from
when they took counsel together: Place of Advice is the name of the
mountain. They got together and identified themselves there:
"Here am I: I am a Quiche person, and you there, you are Tams,
this will be your name," the Tams were told. And then the Ilocs were
told:
"You are the Ilocs, this will be your name. The three Quiches must
not be lost. We are united in our word," they said when they fixed
their names.
And then the Cakchiquels were named: their name became
Cakchiquels. So, too, with the Rabinals; this became their name. It
hasn't been lost today.
And then there are those of the Bird House, as they are named today.
These are the names they named for each other. When they held
council there, they were still waiting for the dawning, watching for
the appearance of the rising star, the one that came before the sun
when it was born.
"When we came away from Tulan, we broke ourselves apart," they
told each other.
This is what kept weighing on their hearts, the great pain they went
through: there was nothing to eat, nothing to feed on. They were
just smelling the tips of their staffs*(381) as if they were
thinking of eating them, but they weren't eating at all as they came.
And it isn't clear how they crossed over the sea. They crossed
over as if there were no sea. They just crossed over on some stones,
stones piled up in the sand. And they gave it a name: Rock Rows,
Furrowed Sands was their name for the place where they crossed through
the midst of the sea. Where the waters divided, they crossed over.
And this is what weighed on their hearts when they took counsel:
that they had nothing to eat. They had one beverage to drink, just one
atole, which they brought up on the mountain named Place of Advice.
And they also brought Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz.
Observing a great fast was Jaguar Quitze, with his wife; Great
Seahouse is his wife's name.
Likewise doing it was Jaguar Night, with his wife, named Prawn
House.
And Mahucutah was also there at the great fast, with his wife, named
Hummingbird House, along with True Jaguar, whose wife's name is

Page 93 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Macaw House.
So these were the ones who fasted, there in the blackness, in the
early dawn. Their sadness was great when they were there on the
mountain named Place of Advice today. And their gods spoke there.
AND THEN TOHIL, ALONG WITH AUILIX AND HACAUITZ, SPOKE TO THEM, to
Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar:
"Let's just go, let's just get up, let's not stay here. Please
give us places to hide. It's nearly dawn. Wouldn't you look pitiful if
we became plunder for warriors? Construct places where we can remain
yours, you penitents and sacrificers, and give one place to each of
us," they said when they spoke.
"Very well. Let's get out and search the forests," they all replied.
After that they packed each one of the gods on their backs.*(382)
And then Auilix went into the canyon named Concealment Canyon, as
they called it, into the great canyon in the forest. Pauilix is the
name of the place today. He was left there, placed in the canyon by
Jaguar Night, coming first in the sequence of placements.
And then Hacauitz was placed above a great red river.*(383) Hacauitz
is the name of the mountain today, and it became their citadel. So the
god Hacauitz remained there, and Mahucutah stayed with his god. This
was the second god to be hidden by them. Hacauitz didn't stay in the
forest. It was on a bare mountain*(384) that Hacauitz was hidden.
And then came Jaguar Quitze. He arrived in the great forest there.
Tohil was put into hiding by Jaguar Quitze; the mountain is called
Patohil today. Then they gave Concealment Canyon an epithet: Tohil
Medicine. Masses of serpents and masses of jaguars, rattlesnakes,
yellowbites were there in the forest where he was hidden*(385) by
the penitents and sacrificers.
So they were there in unity: Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah,
and True Jaguar. In unity they waited for the dawn, there on top of
the mountain named Hacauitz.
Also, a short distance away, was the god of the Tams, together
with the Ilocs. Tam Tribe is the name of the place where the god of
the Tams was, there at the dawn. Net Weave Tribe is the name of the
place where dawn came for the Ilocs. The god of the Ilocs was just a
short distance away.
Also there were all the Rabinals, Cakchiquels, those of the Bird
House, all the tribes, small and great. In unity they stopped
there,*(386) and in unity they had their dawning there. In unity
they waited there for the rising of the great star named daybringer.
"It will rise before the sun when the dawn comes," they said, and
they were in unity there: Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah,
and True Jaguar. There was no sleep, no rest for them. They cried
their hearts and their guts out,*(387) there at the dawning and
clearing, and so they looked terrible. Great sorrow, great anguish
came over them; they were marked by their pain. They just stayed
that way.
"Coming here hasn't been sweet for us. Alas! If we could only see
the birth of the sun! What have we done? We all had one identity,

Page 94 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

one mountain, but we sent ourselves into exile," they said when they
talked among themselves. They talked about sorrow, about anguish,
about crying and wailing, since their hearts had not yet been set to
rest by the dawn.
And these are the ones who did feel settled there: the gods who were
in the canyons, in the forests, just out in the bromelias, in the
hanging mosses, not yet set on pedestals.*(388) At first, Tohil,
Auilix, and Hacauitz actually spoke. The greatness of their day and
the greatness of their breath of spirit set them above all the other
tribal gods. Their genius was manifold and their ways were manifold,
their strategies.*(389) They were chilling, they were frightening in
their very being and in the hearts of the tribes, whose thoughts
were calmed by Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True
Jaguar. Their hearts did not yet harbor ill will*(390) toward the gods
who had been taken up and carried away when they all came from Tulan
Zuyua, there in the east, and who were now in the forest.
These were the dawning places: Patohil, Pauilix, and Hacauitz, as
they are called today. And this is where our grandfathers, our fathers
had their sowing, their dawning.
This is what we shall explain next: the dawning and showing of the
sun, moon, and stars.
AND HERE IS THE DAWNING AND SHOWING OF THE SUN, MOON, AND
STARS. And
Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar were overjoyed
when they saw the daybringer. It came up first. It looked brilliant
when it came up, since it was ahead of the sun.
After that they unwrapped their copal incense, which came from the
east, and there was triumph in their hearts when they unwrapped it.
They gave their heartfelt thanks with three kinds at once:
Mixtam Copal is the name of the copal brought by Jaguar Quitze.
Cauiztan Copal, next, is the name of the copal brought by Jaguar
Night.
Godly Copal, as the next one is called, was brought by Mahucutah.
The three of them had their copal, and this is what they burned as
they incensed*(391) the direction of the rising sun. They were
crying sweetly as they shook their burning copal, the precious copal.
After that they cried because they had yet to see and yet to witness
the birth of the sun.
And then, when the sun came up, the animals, small and great, were
happy. They all came up from the rivers and canyons; they waited on
all the mountain peaks. Together they looked toward the place where
the sun came out.
So then the puma and jaguar cried out, but the first to cry out
was a bird, the parrot by name. All the animals were truly happy.
The eagle, the white vulture, small birds, great birds spread their
wings, and the penitents and sacrificers knelt down. They were
overjoyed, together with the penitents and sacrificers of the Tams,
the Ilocs.
And the Rabinals, Cakchiquels, those of the Bird House.

Page 95 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

And the Sweatbath House, Talk House, Quiba House, those of the
Yoke House.
And the Yaqui Sovereign- however many tribes there may be today.
There were countless peoples, but there was just one dawn for all
tribes.
And then the face of the earth was dried out by the sun. The sun was
like a person when he revealed himself. His face was hot, so he
dried out the face of the earth. Before the sun came up it was
soggy, and the face of the earth was muddy before the sun came up. And
when the sun had risen just a short distance he was like a person, and
his heat was unbearable. Since he revealed himself only when he was
born, it is only his reflection that now remains.*(392) As they put it
in their own words:
"The sun that shows itself is not the real sun."
And then, all at once, Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz were turned to
stone, along with the idols of the puma, jaguar, rattlesnake,
yellowbite, which the White Sparkstriker took with him into the
trees.*(393) Everywhere, all of them became stone when the sun,
moon, and stars appeared. Perhaps we would have no relief from the
voracious animals today- the puma, jaguar, rattlesnake, yellowbiteand perhaps it wouldn't even be our day today, if the original animals
hadn't been turned to stone*(394) by the sun when he came up.
There was great happiness in the hearts of Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar
Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar. They were overjoyed when it dawned.
The people on the mountain of Hacauitz were not yet numerous; just a
few were there. Their dawning was there and they burned copal there,
incensing the direction of the rising sun. They came from there: it is
their own mountain, their own plain. Those named Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar
Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar came from there, and they began
their increase on that mountain.
And that became their citadel, since they were there when the sun,
moon, and stars appeared, when it dawned and cleared on the face of
the earth, over everything under the sky.
AND THERE BEGAN THEIR SONG NAMED "THE BLAME IS OURS." They sang
out the lament of their very hearts and guts. In their song they
stated:
"Alas!
We were lost at Tulan!
We shattered ourselves!
We left our elder brothers behind!
Our younger brothers!
Where did they see the sun?
Where must they be staying,
now that the dawn has come?"
They were speaking of the penitents and sacrificers who were the Yaqui
people.
"Even though Tohil is his name, he is the same as the god of the
Yaqui people, who is named Yolcuat and Quitzalcuat. When we divided,
there at Tulan, at Zuyua, they left with us, and they shared our

Page 96 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

identity when we came away," they said among themselves when they
remembered their faraway brothers, elder and younger, the Yaqui people
whose dawn was there in the place named Mexico today.
And again, there were also the Fishkeeper people. They stayed
there in the east; Sovereign Oloman is their name.
"We left them behind," they said. It was a great weight on their
hearts, up there on Hacauitz. The Tams and Ilocs did likewise,
except that they were in the forest. Tam Tribe is the name of the
place where it dawned for the penitents and sacrificers of the Tams,
with their god, the same Tohil. There was just one name for the god of
all three divisions of the Quiche people.
And again, the name of the god of the Rabinals was the same. His
name was only slightly changed; "One Toh" is the way the name of the
god of the Rabinals is spoken. They say it that way, but it is meant
to be in agreement with the Quiches and with their language.
And the language has differentiated in the case of the
Cakchiquels,*(395) since their god had a different name when they came
away from Tulan Zuyua. Calm Snake is the name of the god of the Bat
House, and they speak a different language today. Along with their
god, the lineages took their names; they are called Keeper of the
Bat Mat and Keeper of the Dancer Mat. Like their god, their language
was differentiated on account of a stone, when they came from Tulan in
the darkness. All the tribes were sown and came to light in unity, and
each division was allocated a name for its god.
And now we shall tell about their stay*(396) and their sojourn there
on the mountain. The four were there together, the ones named Jaguar
Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar. Their hearts cried
out to Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz, who were now amid the bromelias
and hanging mosses.
AND HERE THEY BURN THEIR COPAL, and here also is the origin of the
masking of Tohil.*(397)
And when they went before Tohil and Auilix, they went to visit
them and keep their day. Now they gave thanks before them for the
dawning, and now they bowed down*(398) before their stones, there in
the forest. Now it was only a manifestation of his genius that spoke
when the penitents and sacrificers came before Tohil,*(399) and what
they brought and burned was not great. All they burned before their
gods was resin, just bits of pitchy bark, along with marigolds.*(400)
And when Tohil spoke now it was only his genius. When the gods
taught procedures to the penitents and sacrificers, they said this
when they spoke:
"This very place has become our mountain, our plain. Now that we are
yours, our day and our birth have become great, because all the
peoples are yours, all the tribes. And since we are still your
companions, even in your citadel, we shall give you procedures:
"Do not reveal us to the tribes*(401) when they search for us.*(402)
They are truly numerous now, so don't you let us be hunted down,*(403)
but rather give the creatures of the grasses and grains to us, such as
the female deer and female birds.*(404) Please come give us a little

Page 97 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

of their blood, take pity on us. And leave the pelts of the deer
apart, save them. These are for disguises, for deception. They will
become deer costumes,*(405) and so also they will serve as our
surrogates before the tribes. When you are asked:
'Where is Tohil?' then you will display the deer costumes before
them, and without revealing yourselves. And there is still more for
you to do. You will become great in your very being. Defeat all the
tribes. They must bring blood and lymph before us, they must come to
embrace us. They belong to us already,"*(406) said Tohil, Auilix,
and Hacauitz. They had a youthful appearance when they saw them,
when they came to burn offerings before them.
So then began the hunting of the young of all the birds and deer;
they were taken in the hunt by the penitents and sacrificers.
And when they got hold of the birds and fawns, they would then go to
anoint the mouth of the stone of Tohil or Auilix with the blood of the
deer or bird.*(407) And the bloody drink was drunk by the gods. The
stone would speak at once when the penitents and sacrificers
arrived, when they went to make their burnt offerings.
They did the very same thing before the deerskins: they burned
resin, and they also burned marigolds and yarrow. There was a deerskin
for each one of the gods, which was displayed there on the mountain.
They didn't occupy their houses during the day, but just walked in
the mountains. And this was their food: just the larva of the yellow
jacket, the larva of the wasp, and the larva of the bee,*(408) which
they hunted. As yet there wasn't anything good to eat or good to
drink. Also, it wasn't obvious how to get to their houses, nor was
it obvious where their wives stayed.
And the tribes were already densely packed, settling down one by
one, with each division of a tribe gathering itself together. Now they
were crowding the roads; already their roadways were obvious.
As for Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar, it
wasn't obvious where they were. When they saw the people of the tribes
passing by on the roads, that was when they would get up on the
mountain peaks, just crying out with the cry of the coyote and the cry
of the fox. And they would make the cries of the puma and jaguar,
whenever they saw the tribes out walking in numbers. The tribes were
saying:
"It's just a coyote crying out," and "Just a fox."
"Just a puma. Just a jaguar."
In the minds of all the tribes, it was as if humans weren't
involved. They did it just as a way of decoying the tribes; that was
what their hearts desired. They did it so that the tribes wouldn't get
really frightened just yet; that was what they intended when they
cried out with the cry of the puma and the cry of the jaguar. And
then, when they saw just one or two people out walking, they
intended to overwhelm them.
Each day, when they came back to their houses and wives, they
brought just the same things- yellow-jacket larvae, wasp larvae, and
bee larvae- and gave them to their wives, each day. And when they went

Page 98 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

before Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz, they thought to themselves:
"They are Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz, yet we only give them the
blood of deer and birds, we only draw cords through our ears and
elbows when we ask for our strength and our manhood from Tohil,
Auilix, and Hacauitz. Who will take care of the death of the tribes?
Should we just kill them one by one?" they said among themselves.
And when they went before Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz, they drew
cords through their ears and elbows in front of the gods. They spilled
their blood, they poured gourdfuls into the mouths of the stones.
But these weren't really stones: each one became like a boy when
they arrived, happy once again over the blood.
And then came a further sign as to what the penitents and
sacrificers should do:
"You must win a great many victories. Your right*(409) to do this
came from over there at Tulan, when you brought us here," they were
told. Then the matter of the suckling*(410) was set forth, at the
place called Staggering, and the blood that would result from it,
the rainstorm of blood, also became a gift for Tohil, along with
Auilix and Hacauitz.
Now here begins the abduction of the people of the tribes by
Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar.
AND THEN COMES THE KILLING OF THE TRIBES. This is how they died:
when there was just one person out walking, or just two were out
walking, it wasn't obvious when they took them away.
After that they went to cut them open before Tohil and Auilix.
After that, when they had offered the blood, the skull would be
placed in the road. They would roll it onto the road. So the tribes
were talking:
"A jaguar has been eating," was all that was said, because their
tracks were like a jaguar's tracks when they did their deed. They
did not reveal themselves. Many people were abducted.
It was actually a long time before the tribes came to their senses:
"If it's Tohil and Auilix who are after us, we have only to search
for the penitents and sacrificers. We'll follow their tracks to
wherever their houses are," said all those of the tribes, when they
shared their thoughts among themselves.
After that, they began following the tracks of the penitents and
sacrificers, but they weren't clear. They only saw the tracks of the
deer, the tracks of the jaguar. The tracks weren't clear, nothing
was clear. Where they began the tracks were merely those of
animals.*(411) It was as if the tracks were there for the sole purpose
of leading them astray. The way was not clear:
It would get cloudy.
It would get dark and rainy.*(412)
It would get muddy, too.
It would get misty and drizzly.*(413)
That was all the tribes could see in front of them, and their search
would simply make them weary at heart. Then they would give up.
Because Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz were great in their very

Page 99 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

being, they did this for a long time, there on the mountain. They
did their killing on the frontiers of the tribes when the abductions
began; they singled them out and cut them down.*(414) They would seize
the people of the tribes in the roads, cutting them open before Tohil,
Auilix, and Hacauitz.
And the boys hid there on the mountain. Tohil, Auilix, and
Hacauitz had the appearance of three boys when they went out
walking; these were simply the spirit familiars of the stones. There
was a river. They would bathe there on the bank, just as a way of
revealing themselves, and this gave the place its name. The name of
the river came to be Tohil's Bath, and the tribes saw them there
many times. They would vanish the moment they were seen by the tribes.
Then the news spread as to the whereabouts of Jaguar Quitze,
Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar, and this is when the
tribes realized how they were being killed.
FIRST THE TRIBES TRIED TO PLAN THE DEFEAT OF TOHIL, AUILIX, AND
HACAUITZ. All the penitents and sacrificers of the tribes spoke to the
others. They roused and summoned one another, all of them. Not even
one or two divisions were left out. All of them converged and
presented themselves, then they shared their thoughts. And they
said, as they questioned one another:
"What would assure the defeat of the Cauecs, the Quiche people?
Our vassals have met their ends because of them. Isn't it clear that
our people have been lost because of them? What if they finish us
off with these abductions?"
"Let it be this way: if the fiery splendor of Tohil, Auilix, and
Hacauitz is so great, then let this Tohil become our god! Let him be
captured! Don't let them defeat us completely! Don't we constitute a
multitude of people? And as for the Cauecs, there aren't as many of
them," they said when all of them had assembled. Then the
Fishkeepers spoke to the tribes, saying:
"Who could be bathing every day at the river bank? If it's Tohil,
Auilix, and Hacauitz, then we can defeat them ahead of time. Let the
defeat of the penitents and sacrificers begin right there!" said the
Fishkeepers, and then they spoke further:
"How shall we defeat them?" And then they said:
"Let this be our means for defeating them: since they present the
appearance of adolescent boys at the river, let two maidens go
there. Let them be in full blossom,*(415) maidens who radiate
preciousness,*(416) so that when they go they'll be desirable," they
said.
"Very well. So we'll just search for two perfect maidens," the
others replied. And then they searched among their daughters for those
who were truly radiant maidens. Then they gave the maidens
instructions:
"You must go, our dear daughters. Go wash clothes at the river,
and if you should see three boys, undress yourselves in front of them.
And if their hearts should desire you, you will titillate them. When
they say to you:

Page 100 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

'We're coming after you,' then you are to say:
'Yes.' And then you will be asked:
'Where do you come from? Whose daughters are you?' When they say
that, you are to answer them:
'We are the daughters of lords, so let a sign be forthcoming from
you.' Then they should give you something. If they like your faces you
must really give yourselves up to them. And if you do not give
yourselves up, then we shall kill you. We'll feel satisfied when you
bring back a sign, since we'll think of it as proof that they came
after you," said the lords, instructing the two maidens.
Here are their names: Xtah is the name of the one maiden, and
Xpuch is the name of the other.
AND THEY SENT THE TWO OF THEM, NAMED XTAH AND XPUCH, over to the
place where Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz bathed. All the tribes knew
about this.
And then they went off. They were dressed up, looking truly
beautiful, when they went to the place where Tohil bathed. They were
carrying what looked like their wash when they went off. Now the lords
were pleased over having sent their two daughters there.
And when they arrived at the river, they began to wash. They
undressed themselves, both of them. They were on the rocks, on their
hands and knees,*(417) when Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz came along.
They got to the bank of the river and just barely glanced at the two
maidens washing there, and the maidens got a sudden scare when Tohil
and the others*(418) arrived. They did not go lusting after the two
maidens. Then came the questioning:
"Where do you come from?" the two maidens were asked. "What do you
intend by coming here, to the bank of our river?" they were also
asked.
"We were sent here by the lords, so we came. The lords told us:
'Go see the faces of Tohil and the others, and speak to them,' the
lords told us, 'and also, there must come a sign as to whether you
really saw their faces.*(419) Go!' is what we were told," said the two
maidens, explaining their errand.
But this is what the tribes had intended: that the maidens should be
violated by the spirit familiars of Tohil and the others. Then
Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz spoke, answering the two maidens named
Xtah and Xpuch:
"Good. Let a sign of our word go with you. But you must wait for it,
then give it directly to the lords," they were told.
And then Tohil and the others plotted with the penitents and
sacrificers. Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, and Mahucutah were told:
"You must draw figures on three cloaks. Inscribe them with the signs
of our being. They're for the tribes; they'll go back with the maidens
who are washing. Give them to the maidens," Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar
Night, and Mahucutah were told.
After that, they drew figures for all three of them. Jaguar Quitze
drew first: his image was that of the jaguar. He drew it on his cloak.
And as for Jaguar Night, he drew the image of an eagle on his cloak.

Page 101 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

And the one who drew next was Mahucutah, who drew the images, the
figures of swarms of yellow jackets, swarms of wasps on his cloak.
Then the figures were complete; they had drawn all three of them,
the threefold figures.
After that, when Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, and Mahucutah went
to give the cloaks to those who were named Xtah and Xpuch, they
spoke to them:
"Here is the proof of your word. When you come before the lords
you will say:
'Tohil really spoke to us, and here is the sign we've brought back,'
you'll tell them, and give them the cloaks to try on," the maidens
were told when they were given their instructions.
So then they went back, taking the figured cloaks.
And when they arrived, the lords were happy the moment they
spotted*(420) what they had asked for, hanging from the arms of the
maidens.
"Didn't you see the face of Tohil?" they were asked.
"See it we did," said Xtah and Xpuch.
"Very good. You've brought back some sort of sign. Isn't that so?"
said the lords, since there seemed to be signs of their sin- or so
thought the lords. So then they were shown the figured cloaks by the
maidens: one with a jaguar, one with an eagle, and one with yellow
jackets and wasps drawn on the inside, on a smooth surface.*(421)
And they loved the way the cloaks looked. They costumed
themselves. The jaguar didn't do anything; it was the first figure
to be tried on by a lord.
And when another lord costumed himself with the second figured
cloak, with the drawing of the eagle, the inside of it just felt
good to him. He turned around*(422) in front of them, unfurling
it*(423) in front of all of them.
And then came the third figured cloak to be tried on by a lord; he
costumed himself with the one that had yellow jackets and wasps
painted inside.
And then he started getting stung by the yellow jackets and wasps.
He couldn't endure it, he couldn't stand the stings of the insects.
That lord yelled his mouth off over the insects. Mahucutah's figures
inside the cloak looked like a mere drawing. It was the third
drawing that defeated them.
And then the maidens named Xtah and Xpuch were reprimanded by the
lords:
"How did you get these things you brought back? Where did you go
to get them, you tricksters!" the maidens were told when they were
reprimanded.
Again, all the tribes were defeated because of Tohil. This is what
they had intended: that Tohil would be tempted to go after the
maidens. It then became the profession of Xtah and Xpuch to bark
shins;*(424) the tribes continued to think of them as temptresses.
So the defeat of Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, and Mahucutah was
not brought about, since they were people of genius.

Page 102 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

And then all the tribes plotted again:
"How are we going to beat them? They are truly great in their very
being," they said when they shared their thoughts.
"Even so, we'll invade them and kill them. Let's fit ourselves out
with weapons and shields. Aren't we a multitude? There won't even be
one or two of them left," they said when they shared their thoughts.
All the tribes fitted themselves out. There were masses of killers,
once the killers of all the tribes had joined together.
And as for Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True
Jaguar, they were there on the mountain. Hacauitz is the name of the
mountain where they were, and those spirit boys*(425) of theirs were
hidden there on the mountain. They were not a numerous people then;
their numbers were not equal to the numbers of the tribes. There
were just a few of them on the mountain, their fortress,*(426) so when
it was said that the tribes had planned death for them, all of them
gathered together. They held a council; they all sent for one another.
AND HERE IS THE JOINING TOGETHER OF ALL THE TRIBES, all decked out
now with weapons and shields. Their metal ornaments were countless,
they looked beautiful, all the lords, the men. In truth, they were
just making talk, all of them. In truth, they would become our
captives.
"Since there is a Tohil, and since he is a god, let's celebrate
his day- or let's make him our prize!" they said among themselves. But
Tohil already knew about it, and Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, and
Mahucutah also knew about it. They had heard about it while it was
being plotted, since they were neither asleep nor at rest.
So then all the lance-bearing warriors of the tribes were armed.
After that, all the warriors got up during the night, in order to
enter our very midst. They set off, but they never arrived. They
just fell asleep on the way, all those warriors.
And then they were defeated again by Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night,
and Mahucutah, since every last one of them fell asleep in the road.
Now they couldn't feel a thing. A multitude slept, all of them, and
that's when things got started. Their eyebrows were plucked out, along
with their beards.*(427)
And then the metal was undone from their cloaks, along with their
headdresses.
And their necklaces came off too, and then the necks of their
staffs. Their metal was taken just to cause them a loss of face, and
the plucking was done just to signify the greatness of the Quiche.
After that, they woke up. Right away they reached for their
headdresses, along with the necks of their staffs. There was no
metal on their cloaks and headdresses.
"How could it have been taken from us? Who could have plucked us?
Where did they come from? Our metal has been stolen!" said all the
warriors.
"Perhaps it's those tricksters who've been abducting people! But
it's not over with. Let's not get frightened by them. Let's enter
their very citadel! That's the only way we'll ever see our metal and

Page 103 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

make it ours again!" said all the tribes, but even so, they were
just making talk, all of them.
The hearts of the penitents and sacrificers were content, there on
the mountain, but even so, Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and
True Jaguar were making great plans.
AND THEN JAGUAR QUITZE, JAGUAR NIGHT, MAHUCUTAH, AND TRUE
JAGUAR HAD
A PLAN. They made a fence*(428) at the edge of their citadel. They
just made a palisade of planks and stakes*(429) around their
citadel.*(430)
Next they made manikins; it was as if they had made people. Next
they lined them up on the parapet. They were even equipped with
weapons and shields. Headdresses were included, with metal on top, and
cloaks were included. But they were mere manikins, mere
woodcarvings. They used the metal that belonged to the tribes, which
they had gone to get in the road. This is what they used to decorate
the manikins. They surrounded the citadel.*(431)
And then they asked Tohil about their plan:
"What if we die, and what if we're defeated?" They spoke straight
from their hearts before Tohil.
"Do not grieve. I am here. And here is what you will use on them. Do
not be afraid," Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True
Jaguar were told, and then the matter of the yellow jackets and
wasps was set out.
And when they had gone to get these insects and come back with them,
they put them inside four large gourds, which were placed all around
the citadel. The yellow jackets and wasps were shut inside the gourds.
These were their weapons against the tribes.
And they were spied upon and watched from hiding; their citadel
was studied by the messengers of the tribes.
"There aren't many of them," they said, but when they came to look
it was only the manikins, the woodcarvings, that were moving, with
weapons and shields in their hands. They looked like real people, they
looked like real killers when the tribes saw them.
And all the tribes were happy when they saw there weren't many of
them. The tribes themselves were in crowds; there were countless
people, warriors and killers, the assassins of Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar
Night, and Mahucutah, who were there on the mountain called
Hacauitz. This is where they were when they were invaded. Here we
shall tell about it.
AND THESE ARE THE ONES WHO WERE THERE: JAGUAR QUITZE, JAGUAR
NIGHT, MAHUCUTAH, AND TRUE JAGUAR. They were in unity on the
mountain with their wives and children.
And then all the warriors came, the killers, and it was nothing less
than eight hundred score, or even thirty times eight hundred*(432)
people who surrounded the citadel. They were bellowing, bristling with
weapons and shields, rending their mouths with howling and growling,
bellowing, yelling, whistling through their hands when they came up
below the citadel. But the penitents and sacrificers had no fear; they

Page 104 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

just enjoyed the spectacle*(433) from the parapet of the stockade.
They were lined up with their wives and children. Their hearts were
content, since the tribes were merely making talk.
And then they climbed up the mountainside, and now they were just
a little short of the edge of the citadel.
And then the gourds were opened up- there were four of them around
the citadel- and the yellow jackets and wasps were like a cloud of
smoke when they poured out of each of the gourds. And the warriors
were done in, with the insects landing on their eyes and landing on
their noses, on their mouths, their legs, their arms.*(434) The
insects went after them wherever they were, they overtook them
wherever they were. There were yellow jackets and wasps everywhere,
landing to sting their eyes. They had to watch out for whole swarms of
them, there were insects going after every single person. They were
dazed by the yellow jackets and wasps. No longer able to hold onto
their weapons and shields, they were doubling over*(435) and falling
to the ground, stumbling.*(436) They fell down the mountainside.
And now they couldn't feel a thing when they were hit*(437) with
arrows and cut with axes. Now Jaguar Quitze and Jaguar Night could
even use sticks; even their wives became killers.
Then the Fishkeepers turned away, and all the other tribes just took
off running. The first to be overtaken were finished off, killed,
and it wasn't just a few people who died. For those who didn't die the
chase was carried into their very midst when the insects caught up
with them. There were no manly deeds for them to do, since they no
longer carried weapons and shields.
Then all the tribes were conquered. Now the tribes humbled
themselves before Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, and Mahucutah:
"Take pity on us! Don't kill us!" they said.
"Very well. Although you were destined to join the dead, you will be
payers of tribute for as long as there are days and as long as there
is light," they were told.
Such was the defeat of all the tribes by our first mother-fathers.
It was done there on the mountain named Hacauitz today. This is
where they first began. They grew, they multiplied, they had
daughters, they had sons on Hacauitz. They were happy, once they had
beaten all the tribes, who were defeated there on the mountain.
In this way they accomplished the defeat of the tribes, all the
tribes.
After that, their hearts were content. They informed their sons that
their death was approaching. They very much intended to be taken by
death.
NOW THIS IS WHERE WE SHALL TELL ABOUT THE DEATH OF JAGUAR
QUITZE,
JAGUAR NIGHT, MAHUCUTAH, AND TRUE JAGUAR, as they are named. Since
they knew about their death and disappearance, they left
instructions with their sons. They weren't sickly yet, they weren't
gasping for breath*(438) when they left their word with their sons.
These are the names of their sons:

Page 105 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Jaguar Quitze begot these two: Cocaib was the name of the
firstborn and Cocauib was the name of the second of the sons of Jaguar
Quitze, the grandfather and father of the Cauecs.
And again, Jaguar Night begot two. These are their names: Coacul was
the name of his first son, and the other was called Coacutec, the
second son of Jaguar Night, of the Greathouses.
And Mahucutah begot just one son, named Coahau.
These three had sons, but True Jaguar had no son. They were all true
penitents and sacrificers, and these are the names of their sons, with
whom they left instructions. They were united, the four of them
together. They sang of the pain in their hearts, they cried their
hearts out in their singing. "The Blame Is Ours" is the name of the
song they sang.
And then they advised their sons:
"Our dear sons: we are leaving. We are going back. We have
enlightened words, enlightened advice to leave with you- and with
you who have come from faraway mountains, our dear wives," they told
their wives. They advised each one of them:
"We are going back to our own tribal place.*(439) Again it is the
time of our Lord Deer,*(440) as is reflected in the sky. We have
only to make our return. Our work has been done, our day has been
completed. Since you know this, neither forget us nor put us aside.
You have yet to see your own home and mountain, the place of your
beginning.
"Let it be this way: you must go. Go see the place where we came
from,"*(441) were the words they spoke when they gave their advice.
And then Jaguar Quitze left a sign of his being:
"This is for making requests*(442) of me. I shall leave it with you.
Here is your fiery splendor.*(443) I have completed my instructions,
my counsel," he said when he left the sign of his being, the Bundle of
Flames, as it is called. It wasn't clear just what it was; it was
wound about with coverings. It was never unwrapped. Its sewing
wasn't clear because no one looked on while it was being wrapped.
In this way they left instructions, and then they disappeared from
there on the mountain of Hacauitz. Their wives and children never
saw them again. The nature of their disappearance was not clear. But
whatever the case with their disappearance, their instructions were
clear, and the bundle became precious to those who remained. It was
a memorial to their fathers. Immediately they burned offerings
before this memorial to their fathers.
When the lords began their generation of the people, the Cauecs took
their start from Jaguar Quitze, the grandfather and father; his
sons, named Cocaib and Cocauib, were not lost.
Such was the death of all four of our first grandfathers and
fathers. When they disappeared their sons remained there on the
mountain of Hacauitz; their sons stayed there for awhile. As for all
the tribes, it was now their day to be broken and downtrodden.*(444)
They no longer had any splendor to them, though they were still
numerous.

Page 106 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

All those on Hacauitz*(445) gathered on each day that was for the
remembrance of their fathers. For them, the day of the bundle*(446)
was a great one. They could not unwrap it; for them it stayed bundledthe Bundle of Flames, as they called it. It was given this epithet,
this name when it was left in their keeping by their fathers, who made
it just as a sign of their being.
Such was the disappearance and loss of Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar
Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar, the first people to come across the
sea, from the east. They came here in ancient times. When they died
they were already old. They had a reputation for penitence and
sacrifice.
PART_FIVE
PART FIVE
AND THEN THEY REMEMBERED WHAT HAD BEEN SAID ABOUT THE EAST.
This
is when they remembered the instructions of their fathers. The ancient
things received from their fathers were not lost. The tribes gave them
their wives, becoming their fathers-in-law as they took wives. And
there were three of them who said, as they were about to go away:
"We are going to the east, where our fathers came from," they
said, then they followed their road. The three of them were
representative sons:
Cocaib was the name of the son of Jaguar Quitze who represented
all the Cauecs.*(447)
Coacutec was the name of the son of Jaguar Night who served as the
sole representative of the Greathouses.
Coahau was the name of the only son of Mahucutah, representing the
Lord Quiches.
So these are the names of those who went across the sea. There
were only three who went, but they had skill and knowledge. Their
being was not quite that of mere humans. They advised all their
brothers, elder and younger, who were left behind. They were glad to
go:
"We're not dying. We're coming back," they said when they went,
yet it was these same three who went clear across the sea.
And then they arrived in the east; they went there to receive
lordship. Next comes the name of the lord with dominion over those
of the east, where they arrived.
AND THEN THEY CAME BEFORE THE LORD NAMED NACXIT, the great lord
and sole judge*(448) over a populous domain.
And he was the one who gave out the signs of lordship, all the
emblems; the signs of the Keeper of the Mat and the Keeper of the
Reception House Mat were set forth.
And when the signs of the splendor and lordship of the Keeper of the
Mat and Keeper of the Reception House Mat were set forth, Nacxit
gave a complete set of the emblems of lordship. Here are their names:
Canopy, throne.
Bone flute, bird whistle.

Page 107 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Paint of powdered yellow stone.
Puma's paw, jaguar's paw.
Head and hoof of deer.
Bracelet of rattling snail shells.
Gourd of tobacco.
Nosepiece.
Parrot feathers, heron feathers.
They brought all of these when they came away. From across the
sea, they brought back the writings about Tulan. In the writings, in
their words, they spoke of having cried.*(449)
And then, when they got back up in their citadel, named Hacauitz,
all the Tams and Ilocs gathered there. All the tribes gathered
themselves together; they were happy. When Cocaib, Coacutec, and
Coahau came back, they resumed their lordship over the tribes. The
Rabinals, the Cakchiquels, and those of the Bird House were happy.
Only the signs of the greatness of lordship were revealed before them.
Now the lords became great in their very being; when they had
displayed their lordship previously, it was incomplete.
This was when they were at Hacauitz. The only ones with them were
all those who had originally come from the east. And they spent a long
time there on that mountain. Now they were all numerous.
And the wives of Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, and Mahucutah died
there. Then they came away, they left their mountain place behind.
They sought another mountain where they could settle. They settled
countless mountains, giving them epithets and names. Our first mothers
and our first fathers multiplied and gained strength at those
places, according to what the people of ancient times said when they
told about the abandonment of their first citadel, named Hacauitz.
AND THEN THEY CAME TO A PLACE WHERE THEY FOUNDED A CITADEL
NAMED
THORNY PLACE. They spent a long time there in that one citadel. They
had daughters and sons while they were there. There were actually four
mountains,*(450) but there came to be a single name for the whole
town. Their daughters and sons got married. They just gave them
away. They accepted mere favors and gifts as sufficient payment for
their daughters. They did only what was good.
Then they examined*(451) each division of the citadel. Here are
the names of the divisions of Thorny Place: Dry Place, Bark House,
Culba, Cauinal are the names of the mountains where they stayed.
And this is when they looked out over the mountains of their
citadel. They were seeking a further mountain, since all the divisions
had become more numerous. But those who had brought lordship from
the east had died by now; they had become old in the process of
going from one citadel to another. But their faces did not
die;*(452) they passed them on.
They went through a great deal of pain and affliction;*(453) it
was a long time before the grandfathers and fathers found their
citadel. Here is the name of the citadel where they arrived.
AND BEARDED PLACE IS THE NAME OF THE MOUNTAIN OF THEIR

Page 108 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

CITADEL. They
stayed there and they settled down there.
And they tested their fiery splendor there. They ground their gypsum
their plaster,*(454) in the fourth generation of lords. It was said
that Conache ruled when Nine Deer was the Lord Minister, and then
the lords named Cotuha and Iztayul reigned as Keeper of the Mat and
Keeper of the Reception House Mat. They reigned there at Bearded
Place. It was through their works that it became an excellent citadel.
The number of great houses only reached three, there at Bearded
Place. There were not yet a score and four great houses, but only
three of them:
Just one Cauec great house.
And just one great house for the Greathouses.
And finally, just one for the Lord Quiches.
But the three were housed in just two buildings, one in each*(455)
of the two divisions of the citadel.
This is the way it was when they were at Bearded Place:
They were of just one mind: there was no evil for them, nor were
there difficulties.
Their reign was all in calm: there were no quarrels for them, and no
disturbances.
Their hearts were filled with a steady light: there was nothing of
stupidity and nothing of envy in what they did.
Their splendor was modest: they caused no amazement, nor had they
grown great.
And then they tested themselves. They excelled in the Shield
Dance, there at Bearded Place. They did it as a sign of their
sovereignty. It was a sign of their fiery splendor and a sign of their
greatness.
When it was seen by the Ilocs, the Ilocs began to foment war. It was
their desire that the Lord Cotuha be murdered, and that the other lord
be allied with them.*(456) It was the Lord Iztayul they wanted to
persuade; the Ilocs wanted him as their disciple*(457) in committing
murder. But their jealous plotting behind the back of the Lord
Cotuha failed to work out. They just wanted it over with, but the lord
wasn't killed by the Ilocs on the first try.
Such were the roots of disturbances, of tumult and war. First they
invaded the citadel,*(458) the killers were on the move. What they
wanted was to obliterate the very identity of the Quiches. Only
then, they thought, could they alone have sovereignty, and it was
for this alone that they came to kill. They were captured and they
were made prisoners. Not many of them ever got their freedom again.
And then began the cutting of flesh. They cut the Ilocs open
before the gods. This was in payment*(459) for their wrongs against
Lord Cotuha. And many others went into bondage; they were made into
slaves and serfs. They had simply given themselves up in defeat by
fomenting war against the lord and against the canyon and the
citadel.*(460) What their hearts had desired was the destruction and
disintegration of the very identity of the Quiche lord, but it did not

Page 109 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

come to pass.
In this way it came about that people were cut open before the gods.
The shields of war were made then; it was the very beginning of the
fortification of the citadel at Bearded Place. The root of fiery
splendor was implanted there, and because of it the reign of the
Quiche lords was truly great. They were lords of singular
genius.*(461) There was nothing to humble them; nothing happened to
make fools of them*(462) or to ruin the greatness*(463) of their
reign, which took root there at Bearded Place.
The penance done for the gods increased there, striking terror
again, and all the tribes were terrified, small tribes and great
tribes. They witnessed the arrival of people captured in war, who were
cut open and killed for the splendor and majesty of Lord Cotuha and
Lord Iztayul, along with the Greathouses and the Lord Quiches. There
were only three branches of kin there at the citadel named Bearded
Place.
And it was also there that they began feasting and drinking over the
blossoming of their daughters.*(464) This was the way those who were
called the "Three Great Houses" stayed together. They drank their
drinks there and ate their corn*(465) there, the payment for their
sisters, payment for their daughters. There was only happiness in
their hearts when they did it. They ate, they feasted inside their
palaces.
"This is just our way of being thankful and grateful*(466) that we
have good news and good tidings. It is the sign of our agreements
about the daughters and sons born to our women," they said.
Epithets were bestowed there, and the lineages, the allied tribes,
the principalities*(467) gave themselves names there.
"We are intermarried: we Cauecs, we Greathouses, and we Lord
Quiches," said those of the three lineages and the three great houses.
They spent a long time there at Bearded Place, and then they sought
again and saw another citadel. They left Bearded Place behind.
AND THEN THEY GOT UP AND CAME TO THE CITADEL OF ROTTEN CANE,
as
the name is spoken by the Quiches. The Lords Cotuha and Plumed
Serpent*(468) came along, together with all the other lords. There had
been five changes and five generations*(469) of people since the
origin of light, the origin of continuity, the origin of life and of
humankind.
And they built many houses there.
And they also built houses for the gods, putting these in the center
of the highest part of the citadel. They came and they stayed.
After that their domain grew larger; they were more numerous and
more crowded. Again they planned their great houses, which had to be
regrouped and sorted out because of their growing quarrels. They
were jealous of one another over the prices of their sisters and
daughters, which were no longer a matter of mere food and drink.
So this was the origin of their separation, when they quarreled
among themselves, disturbing the bones and skulls of the dead.*(470)

Page 110 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Then they broke apart into nine lineages, putting an end to quarrels
over sisters and daughters. When the planning of the lordships was
done, the result was a score and four great houses.
It was a long time ago when they all came up onto their citadel,
building a score and four palaces there in the citadel of Rotten Cane.
That was the citadel blessed by the lord bishop*(471) after it had
been abandoned.
They achieved glory there. Their marvelous seats and cushions were
arranged; the varieties of splendor were sorted out for each one of
the lords of the nine lineages. One by one they took their places:
The nine lords of the Cauecs.
The nine lords of the Greathouses.
The four lords of the Lord Quiches.
The two lords of the Zaquics.
They became numerous. Those who were in the following of a given
lord were also numerous, but the lord came first, at the head of his
vassals. There were masses, masses of lineages for each of the
lords. We shall name the titles of the lords one by one, for each of
the great houses.
AND HERE ARE THE TITLES OF THE LORDS WHO LED THE CAUECS,
beginning
with the first in rank:
Keeper of the Mat.
Keeper of the Reception House Mat.
Keeper of Tohil.
Keeper of the Plumed Serpent.
Great Toastmaster of the Cauecs.
Councilor of the Stores.
Lolmet Quehnay.
Councilor of the Ball Court.
Mother of the Reception House.
So these are the lords who led the Cauecs, nine lords with their
palaces ranged around, one for each of them. And now to show their
faces ...*(472)
AND NOW THESE ARE THE LORDS WHO LED THE GREATHOUSES,
beginning
with the first lord:
Lord Minister.
Lord Crier to the People.
Minister of the Reception House.
Great Reception House.
Mother of the Reception House.
Great Toastmaster of the Greathouses.
Lord Auilix.
Yacolatam, or Edge of the Zaclatol Mat.
Great Lolmet Yeoltux.
So there were nine lords who led the Greathouses.
AND NOW THESE ARE THE LORD QUICHES. Here are the titles of the
lords:

Page 111 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Crier to the People.
Lord Lolmet.
Lord Great Toastmaster of the Lord Quiches.
Lord Hacauitz.
Four lords led the Lord Quiches, with their palaces ranged around.
AND THERE WERE ALSO TWO LINEAGES OF ZAQUIC LORDS:
Lord Corntassel House.
Minister for the Zaquics.
There was just one palace for these two lords.
Such was the arrangement of the score and four lords, and there came
to be a score and four great houses as well.
THEN SPLENDOR AND MAJESTY GREW AMONG THE QUICHE. The
greatness and
weight of the Quiche reached its full splendor and majesty with the
surfacing and plastering of the canyon and citadel. The tribes came,
whether small or great and whatever the titles of their lords,
adding to the greatness of the Quiche. As splendor and majesty grew,
so grew the houses of gods and the houses of lords.
But the lords could not have accomplished it, they could not have
done the work of building their houses or the houses of the gods, were
it not for the fact that their vassals had become numerous. They
neither had to lure them nor did they kidnap them or take them away by
force, because each one of them rightfully belonged to the lords.
And the elder and younger brothers of the lords also became populous.
Each lord led a crowded life, crowded with petitions.*(473) The
lords were truly valued and had truly great respect. The
birthdays*(474) of the lords were made great and held high by their
vassals. Those who lived in the canyons and those who lived in the
citadels multiplied then. Even so they would not have been numerous,
had not all the tribes arrived to give themselves up.
And when war befell their canyons and citadels, it was by means of
their genius that the Lord Plumed Serpent and the Lord Cotuha blazed
with power. Plumed Serpent became a true lord of genius:
On one occasion*(475) he would climb up to the sky; on another he
would go down the road to Xibalba.
On another occasion he would be serpentine, becoming an actual
serpent.
On yet another occasion he would make himself aquiline, and on
another feline;*(476) he would become like an actual eagle or a jaguar
in his appearance.
On another occasion it would be a pool of blood; he would become
nothing but a pool of blood.
Truly his being was that of a lord of genius. All the other lords
were fearful before him. The news spread;*(477) all the tribal lords
heard about the existence of this lord of genius.
And this was the beginning and growth of the Quiche, when the Lord
Plumed Serpent made the signs of greatness. His face was not forgotten
by his grandsons and sons. He didn't do these things just so there
would be one single lord, a being of genius, but they had the effect

Page 112 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

of humbling all the tribes when he did them. It was just his way of
revealing himself, but because of it he became the sole head*(478)
of the tribes.
This lord of genius named Plumed Serpent was in the fourth
generation of lords; he was both Keeper of the Mat and Keeper of the
Reception House Mat.
And so he left signs and sayings for the next generation. They
achieved splendor and majesty, and they, too, begot sons, making the
sons still more populous. Tepepul and Iztayul were begotten; they
merely served out their reign, becoming the fifth generation of lords.
They begot another generation of lords.
AND HERE ARE THE NAMES OF THE SIXTH GENERATION OF LORDS. There
were two great lords; they were fiery. Quicab was the name of one
lord; Cauizimah was the name of the other.
And Quicab and Cauizimah did a great deal in their turn. They
added to the greatness of the Quiche because they truly had genius.
They crushed and they shattered the canyons and citadels of the
tribes, small and great- the ones that had citadels among them in
ancient times, nearby:
There was a mountain place of the Cakchiquels, called Above the
Nettles today.
And also a mountain place of the Rabinals, Place of Spilt Water.
And a mountain of the Caoques, Plaster House.
And then a citadel of the White Earths, Above the Hot Springs.
Under Ten, Before the Building, and Willow Tree.
They all hated Quicab. They made war, but in fact they were
brought down, they were shattered, these canyons, these citadels of
the Rabinals, Cakchiquels, White Earths. All the tribes went down on
their faces or flat on their backs.*(479) The warriors of Quicab
kept up the killing for a long time, until there were only one or
two groups, from among all the enemies, who hadn't brought tribute.
Their citadels fell and they brought tribute to Quicab and
Cauizimah. Their lineages came to be bled, shot full of arrows at
the stake.*(480) Their day came to nothing, their heritage came to
nothing.
Projectiles alone were the means for breaking the citadels.*(481)
All at once the earth itself would crack open; it was as if a
lightning bolt had shattered the stones. In fear, the members of one
tribe after another*(482) went before the gum tree,*(483) carrying
in their hands*(484) the signs of the citadels, with the result that a
mountain of stones is there today. Only a few of these aren't cut
stones;*(485) the rest look as though they had been split with an axe.
The result is there on the flat*(486) named Petatayub; it is obvious
to this day. Everyone who passes by can see it as a sign of the
manhood of Quicab. He could not be killed, nor could he be
conquered. He was truly a man, and all the tribes brought tribute.
And then all the lords made plans; they moved to cordon off the
canyons and citadels, the fallen citadels of all the tribes.
AFTER THAT CAME THE SENTRIES, to watch for the makers of war. Now

Page 113 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

lookout lineages were established to occupy the conquered mountains:
"Otherwise the tribes would return to inhabit their citadels," all
the lords said when they had all shared their thoughts. Then the
assignments were given out:
"Let them be like a palisade to us, and like doubles for our own
lineages,*(487) and like a stockade, a fortress to us. Let them now
become our anger, our manliness," said all the lords. The
assignments were given to each of the lineages that were to provide
opposition to the makers of war.
And then they were notified, and then they went to their posts,
occupying the mountain places of the tribes:
"Go, because these are now our mountains. Do not be afraid. The
moment there are makers of war again, coming back among you as your
murderers, send for us to come and kill them,"*(488) Quicab and the
Minister and the Crier to the People told them, notifying all of them.
Then they went off, those who are called the Point of the Arrow,
Angle of the Bowstring. Their grandfathers and fathers split up
then; they were on each of the mountains. They went just as guards
of the mountains, and as arrowhead and bowstring guards, and as guards
against the makers of war as well. None of them had been there at
the dawning nor did any of them have his own god;*(489) they just
blocked the way to the citadel. They all went out:
Keepers of Above the Nettles, Keepers of Chulimal, White River, Deer
Dance Plaza, Plank Place, Eighteen.
Also, Keepers of Earthquake, Meteor, Hunahpu Place.
And Keepers of Spilt Water, Keepers of Cut Rock, Keepers of
Plaster House, Keepers of Ziya House, Keepers of Hot Springs,
Keepers of Under Ten, of the plains, of the mountains.
The war sentries, the guardians of the land, went out, they went
on behalf of Quicab and Cauizimah, Keeper of the Mat and Keeper of the
Reception House Mat, and on behalf of the Minister and the Crier to
the People. There were four lords who posted messengers and sentries
against the makers of war:
Quicab and Cauizimah are the names of the two lords who led the
Cauecs.
Quema is the name of the lord who led the Greathouses.
And Armadillo Dung is the name of the lord who led the Lord Quiches.
So these are the names of the lords who posted messengers and
couriers. Their own vassals went to the mountains, to each one of
the mountains, and as soon as they had gone, spoils kept coming
back, and prisoners of war kept coming back to Quicab and Cauizimah,
to the Minister and the Crier to the People. The Points of the
Arrows and Angles of the Bowstrings made war. They took spoils and
prisoners again. There came to be heroes again, among those who were
sentries. They were given seats and honored; they were generously
remembered by the lords when they came to turn over all their spoils
and their prisoners.
After that, when the Lords Keeper of the Mat, Keeper of the
Reception House Mat, Minister, and Crier to the People had shared

Page 114 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

their thoughts, their decision came out:
"When it comes to the ennobling of the lookout lineages,*(490) we'll
induct*(491) only those who are first in rank. I am Keeper of the
Mat."
"And I am Keeper of the Reception House Mat."
"The nobility of Keeper of the Mat, which is mine- and that which is
yours,*(492) Lord Minister- should enter into this. Ministers will
be ennobled." And all the lords spoke as they gathered their thoughts.
The Tams and Ilocs did just the same; the three divisions of the
Quiche were in concord*(493) when they carried out the investiture.
They titled those of the first rank among their vassals.
In this way the decision was reached. But they weren't inducted at
Quiche. The mountain where the first-ranking vassals were inducted has
a name; all of them were summoned, from each of the mountains where
they were, and they gathered in just one place. Under the Twine, Under
the Cord is the name of the mountain where they were inducted, where
they entered into nobility. It was done there in Chulimal.
And here are their titles, their honors, and their marks: a score of
Ministers and a score of Keepers of the Mat were created by the Keeper
of the Mat and the Keeper of the Reception House Mat, and by the
Minister and the Crier to the People.
All of these entered the nobility: Ministers, Keepers of the Mat,
eleven Great Toastmasters, Minister for the Lords, Minister for the
Zaquics, Military Minister, Military Keeper of the Mat, Military
Walls, and Military Corners are the titles that came in when the
soldiers were titled and named to their seats, their cushions.
These were the first-ranking vassals, watchers and listeners for the
Quiche people, Points of the Arrows, Angles of the Bowstrings, a
palisade, an enclosure, a wall, a fortress around Quiche.*(494)
And the Tams and Ilocs did the same thing; they inducted and
titled the first-ranking vassals for each mountain.
So this was the origin of the noble Ministers and Keepers of the Mat
that exist for each of the mountains today. The sequence was such that
they came out later than the Keeper of the Mat proper and the Keeper
of the Reception House Mat, and later than the Minister and the
Crier to the People.
AND NOW WE SHALL NAME THE NAMES OF THE HOUSES OF THE GODS,
although the houses have the same names as the gods:
Great Monument of Tohil is the name of the building that housed
Tohil of the Cauecs.
Auilix, next, is the name of the building that housed Auilix of
the Greathouses.
Hacauitz is the name, then, of the building that housed the god of
the Lord Quiches.
Corntassel, whose house of sacrifice*(495) can still be seen, is the
name of another great monument.
These were the locations of the stones whose days were kept by the
Quiche lords. Their days were also kept by all the tribes. When the
tribes burned offerings, they came before Tohil first.

Page 115 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

After that, they greeted the Keeper of the Mat and Keeper of the
Reception House Mat next, then they handed over their quetzal feathers
and their tribute to the lords, these same lords.
And so they nurtured and provided for the Keeper of the Mat and
Keeper of the Reception House Mat,*(496) who had been victorious
over their citadels.
They were great lords, they were people of genius. Plumed Serpent
and Cotuha were lords of genius, and Quicab and Cauizimah were lords
of genius. They knew whether war would occur; everything they saw
was clear to them.*(497) Whether there would be death, or whether
there would be famine, or whether quarrels would occur, they knew it
for certain, since there was a place to see it, there was a
book.*(498) Council Book was their name for it.
But it wasn't only in this way that they were lords. They were great
in their own being and observed great fasts. As a way of
cherishing*(499) their buildings and cherishing their lordship, they
fasted for long periods, they did penance before their gods.
And here is their way of fasting:
For nine score days they would fast,*(500) and for nine they would
do penance and burn offerings.
Thirteen score was another of their fasts, and for thirteen they
would do penance and burn offerings before Tohil and their other gods.
They would only eat zapotes, matasanos,*(501) jocotes; there was
nothing made of corn for their meals.
Even if they did penance for seventeen score, then for seventeen
they fasted, they did not eat. They achieved truly great
abstinence.*(502)
This was a sign that they had the being of true lords. And there
weren't any women with them when they slept;*(503) they kept
themselves apart when they fasted. They just stayed in the houses of
the gods, each day. All they did was keep the days, burn offerings,
and do penance. They were there whether it was dark or dawn; they just
cried their hearts and their guts out when they asked for light and
life for their vassals and their domain. They lifted their faces to
the sky, and here is their prayer before their gods, when they made
their requests.
AND THIS IS THE CRY OF THEIR HEARTS, here it is:
"Wait! On this blessed day,*(504)
thou Hurricane, thou Heart of the Sky-Earth,
thou giver of ripeness and freshness,*(505)
and thou giver of daughters and sons,
spread thy stain, spill thy drops
of green and yellow;*(506)
give life and beginning
to those I bear and beget,
that they might multiply*(507) and grow,
nurturing and providing for thee,
calling to thee along the roads and paths,
on rivers, in canyons,

Page 116 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

beneath the trees and bushes;
give them their daughters and sons.
"May there be no blame, obstacle, want or misery;
let no deceiver come behind or before them,
may they neither be snared nor wounded,
nor seduced, nor burned,
nor diverted below the road nor above it;*(508)
may they neither fall over backward nor stumble;
keep them on the Green Road, the Green Path.
"May there be no blame or barrier for them
through any secrets or sorcery of thine;*(509)
may thy nurturers and providers be good
before thy mouth and thy face,*(510)
thou, Heart of Sky; thou, Heart of Earth;
thou, Bundle of Flames;
and thou, Tohil, Auilix, Hacauitz,
under the sky, on the earth,
the four sides, the four corners;
may there be only light, only continuity within,
before thy mouth and thy face, thou god."
So it was with the lords when they fasted during nine score,
thirteen score, or seventeen score days; their days of fasting were
many. They cried their hearts out over their vassals and over all
their wives and children. Each and every lord did service, as a way of
cherishing the light of life and of cherishing lordship.
Such were the lordships of the Keeper of the Mat, Keeper of the
Reception House Mat, Minister, and Crier to the People. They went into
fasting two by two, taking turns at carrying the tribes and all the
Quiche people on their shoulders.*(511)
At its root the word came from just one place, and the root of
nurturing and providing was the same as the root of the word. The Tams
and Ilocs did likewise, along with the Rabinals, Cakchiquels, those of
the Bird House, Sweatbath House, Talk House. They came away in
unity, having heard, there at Quiche, what all of them should do.
It wasn't merely that they became lords;*(512) it wasn't just that
they gathered in gifts*(513) from nurturers and providers who merely
made food and drink*(514) for them. Nor did they wantonly
falsify*(515) or steal their lordship, their splendor, their
majesty. And it wasn't merely that they crushed the canyons and
citadels of the tribes, whether small or great, but that the tribes
paid a great price:
There came turquoise, there came metal.
And there came drops of jade and other gems that measured the
width of four fingers or a full fist across.*(516)
And there came green and red featherwork,*(517) the tribute of all
the tribes. It came to the lords of genius Plumed Serpent and
Cotuha, and to Quicab and Cauizimah as well, to the Keeper of the Mat,
Keeper of the Reception House Mat, Minister, and Crier to the People.
What they did was no small feat, and the tribes they conquered

Page 117 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

were not few in number. The tribute of Quiche came from many tribal
divisions.
And the lords had undergone pain and withstood it; their rise to
splendor had not been sudden. Actually it was Plumed Serpent who was
the root of the greatness of the lordship.
Such was the beginning of the rise and growth*(518) of Quiche.
And now we shall list the generations of lords, and we shall also
name the names of all these lords.
AND HERE ARE THE GENERATIONS, THE SEQUENCES OF LORDSHIPS, so
that
all of them will be clear.
Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar were our
first grandfathers, our first fathers when the sun appeared, when
the moon and stars appeared.
And here are the generations, the sequences, of lordships. We
shall begin from here, at their very root. The lords will come up
two by two,*(519) as each generation of lords enters and
succeeds*(520) the previous grandfathers and lords of the citadel,
going on through each and every one of the lords.
And here shall appear the faces of each one of the lords.
AND HERE SHALL APPEAR THE FACES, ONE BY ONE, OF EACH OF THE
QUICHE
LORDS ...*(521)
Jaguar Quitze, origin of the Cauecs.
Cocauib, in the second generation after Jaguar Quitze.
Jaguar Conache, who began the office of Keeper of the Mat, was in
the third generation.
Cotuha and Iztayul, in the fourth generation.
Plumed Serpent and Cotuha, at the root of the lords of genius,
were in the fifth generation.
Tepepul and Iztayul next, sixth in the sequence.
Quicab and Cauizimah, in the seventh change of lordship, were the
culmination of genius.
Tepepul and Xtayub, in the eighth generation.
Tecum and Tepepul, in the ninth generation.
Eight Cords, with Quicab, in the tenth generation of lords.
Seven Thought and Cauatepech next, eleventh in the sequence of
lords.
Three Deer and Nine Dog, in the twelfth generation of lords. And
they were ruling when Tonatiuh arrived. They were hanged by the
Castilian people.
Tecum and Tepepul were tributary to the Castilian people. They had
already been begotten as the thirteenth generation of lords.
Don Juan de Rojas and don Juan Cortes, in the fourteenth
generation of lords. They are the sons of Tecum and Tepepul.
So these are the generations, the sequences of lordships for the
Keeper of the Mat and Keeper of the Reception House Mat, the lords who
have led the Cauecs of Quiche. Next we shall name the lineages.
And here are the great houses of each one of the lords in the

Page 118 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

following of the Keeper of the Mat and Keeper of the Reception House
Mat. These are the names of the nine lineages of the Cauecs, nine
great houses. Here are the titles of the rulers of each one of the
great houses:
Lord Keeper of the Mat, with one great house. Granary is the name of
the palace.
Lord Keeper of the Reception House Mat. Bird House is the name of
his palace.
Great Toastmaster of the Cauecs, with one great house.
Lord Keeper of Tohil, with one great house.
Lord Keeper of the Plumed Serpent, with one great house.
Councilor of the Stores, with one great house.
Lolmet Quehnay, with one great house.
Councilor of the Ball Court, Xcuxeba, with one great house.
Sovereign Yaqui, with one great house.
So these are the nine lineages of the Cauecs. Many vassals are
counted in the following of these nine great houses.
AND HERE ARE THOSE OF THE GREATHOUSES, with nine more great
houses. First we shall name the genealogy of the lordship. It began,
from just one root, at the origin of the root of the day and the
light:
Jaguar Night, first grandfather and father.
Coacul and Coacutec, in the second generation.
Cochahuh and Cotzibaha, in the third generation.
Nine Deer next, in the fourth generation.
Cotuha, in the fifth generation of lords.
And Monkey House next, in the sixth generation.
And Iztayul, in the seventh generation of lords.
Cotuha then, eighth in the sequence of lordships.
Nine Deer, ninth in the sequence.
Quema, as the next one was called, in the tenth generation.
Lord Cotuha, in the eleventh generation.
Don Cristobal, as he was called, became lord in the presence of
the Castilian people.
Don Pedro de Robles is Lord Minister today.
And these are all the lords who come in the following of the Lord
Minister. Now we shall give the title of the ruler of each one of
the great houses:
Lord Minister, the first-ranking lord at the head of the
Greathouses, with one great house.
Lord Crier to the People, with one great house.
Lord Minister of the Reception House, with one great house.
Great Reception House,*(522) with one great house.
Mother of the Reception House, with one great house.
Great Toastmaster of the Greathouses, with one great house.
Lord Auilix, with one great house.
Yacolatam, with one great house.
So these are the great houses at the head of the Greathouses;
these are the names of the nine lineages of the Greathouses, as they

Page 119 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

are called. There are many branch lineages in the following of each
one of these lords; we have named only the first-ranking titles.
AND NOW THESE ARE FOR THE LORD QUICHES. Here are their
grandfathers and fathers:
Mahucutah, the first person.
Coahau is the name of the lord of the second generation.
Red Banner.
Cocozom.
Comahcun.
Seven Cane.
Cocamel.
Coyabacoh.
Person of Bam.
So these are the lords at the head of the Lord Quiches; these are
their generations and sequences.
And here are the lords within the palaces, with just four great
houses:
Crier to the People for the Lords is the title of the first lord,
with one great house.
Lolmet of the Lords, the second lord, with one great house.
Great Toastmaster of the Lords, the third lord, with one great
house.
And Hacauitz, the fourth lord, with one great house.
And so these are the four great houses at the head of the Lord
Quiches.
AND THERE ARE THREE GREAT TOASTMASTERS IN ALL. They are like
fathers
to all the Quiche lords. They come together in unity, these three
Toastmasters. They are givers of birth, they are Mothers of the
Word, they are Fathers of the Word, great in being few,*(523) these
three Toastmasters:
Great Toastmaster for the Cauecs, first.
And Great Toastmaster for the Greathouses, second.
Great Toastmaster Lord for the Lord Quiches, third of the Great
Toastmasters.
And so there are three Toastmasters, one representing each of
these lineages.
THIS IS ENOUGH ABOUT THE BEING OF QUICHE, given that there is no
longer a place to see it. There is the original book and ancient
writing*(524) owned by the lords, now lost, but even so, everything
has been completed here concerning Quiche, which is now named Santa
Cruz.
(See illustration: Map of places mentioned in the Popol
Vuh.)
NOTES_AND_COMMENTS
NOTES AND COMMENTS
Quiche words in brackets are corrections of the spellings in the
Popol Vuh manuscript. Popol Vuh is abbreviated P.V. throughout.

Page 120 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Sources for the meanings of words, here and in the Glossary, are cited
by the following letter code (see the Bibliography for the full
citations):
(A.) Miguel Alvarado Lopez, Lexico medico quiche-espanol.
(B.) Domingo de Basseta, "Vocabulario en lengua quiche."
(C.) Lyle Campbell, "Prestamos linguisticos en el Popol Vuh."
(D.) Alonso de Molina, Vocabulario en lengua castellana y mexicana.
(E.) Charles Etienne Brasseur de Bourbourg, Gramatica de la lengua
quiche.
(F.) Floyd G. Lounsbury, "The Identities of the Mythological
Figures in the 'Cross Group' Inscriptions."
(G.) Pantaleon de Guzman, "Compendio de nombres en lengua
cakchiquel."
(K.) Terrence Kaufman, "Common Cholan Lexical Items."
(L.) Robert M. Laughlin, The Great Tzotzil Dictionary.
(M.) Antonio de Ciudad Real, Diccionario de Motul.
(P.) Pedro Moran, "Bocabulario de solo los nombres de la lengua
pokoman."
(Q.) Munro S. Edmonson, Quiche-English Dictionary.
(R.) Adrian Recinos et al., Popol Vuh.
(S.) Linda Schele, Notebook for the Maya Hieroglyphic Writing
Workshop.
(T.) Fermin Joseph Tirado, "Vocabulario de lengua kiche."
(V.) Francisco de Varela, "Calepino en lengua cakchiquel."
(X.) Gail Maynard and Patricio Xec, "Diccionario preliminar del
idioma quiche."
(Z.) Dionysio de Zuniga, "Diccionario pocomchi-castellano y
castellano-pocomchi."
INTRODUCTION
* My account of Mayan archaeology is based largely on Michael D.
Coe, The Maya, and Norman Hammond, Ancient Maya Civilization.
*(2) For a general discussion of pre-Columbian books in the Mayan
region, see J. Eric S. Thompson, A Commentary on the Dresden Codex,
chap. 1; the hieroglyphic book now in Dresden is reproduced in color
in this same source. For a color reproduction of the fragment that was
found more recently in Chiapas, see Coe, The Maya Scribe and His
World; for a demonstration of the authenticity of this fragment, see
John B. Carlson, "The Grolier Codex."
*(3) For a comparison of the towns of Quiche and Chichicastenango
during the colonial period, see Robert M. Carmack, The Quiche Mayas of
Utatlan, pp. 76, 106, 304, 328.
*(4) For a longer account of the odyssey of the Ximenez
manuscript, see Adrian Recinos et al., Popol Vuh: The Sacred Book of
the Ancient Quiche Maya, pp. 32-45.
*(5) For the Vienna volume see Francisco Ximenez, Las historias
del origen de los indios de esta provincia de Guatemala; for the Paris
volume, see Charles Etienne Brasseur de Bourbourg, Popol Vuh: Le livre
sacre et les mythes de l'antiquite americaine. The title chosen by
Scherzer for the Vienna volume is the one used by Ximenez; Brasseur

Page 121 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

was the first to call the alphabetic version of the ancient book by
the name of its hieroglyphic predecessor. His version of the Quiche
text leaves much to be desired; by far the best version ever published
is that of Leonhard S. Schultze Jena (Popol Vuh: Das heilige Buch
der Quiche-Indianer von Guatemala). A highly legible facsimile of
the manuscript (easier to read than the original) was published in
1973 by the Guatemalan Ministry of Education (Francisco Ximenez, Popol
Vuh).
For evidence that the manuscript Ximenez worked from contained at
least a few hieroglyphs, see notes *(472) and *(521). Maya writing,
like Egyptian and Chinese, was both logographic and phonetic, which is
to say that a given word could be written with a single sign all its
own, but could also be spelled out with glyphs that stood for the
sounds of its individual consonants or syllables; see David Humiston
Kelley, Deciphering the Maya Script, chaps. 6 and 9. The monkey
patrons of writing and painting and the close relationship between
these arts are discussed in Coe, "Supernatural Patrons of Maya Scribes
and Artists."
*(6) The four corners in question here are not the four cardinal
points, but the four places marked out by the solstitial rising and
setting points of the sun; see Eva Hunt, The Transformation of the
Hummingbird, chap. 6.
*(7) See Alfred M. Tozzer, Landa's Relacion de las cosas de Yucatan,
pp. 153-54, for a description of the reading of a hieroglyphic book in
Yucatan. At present there are public readings of alphabetic
manuscripts in the Yucatec Maya ceremonial center of Xcacal, in
Quintana Roo; see Allan F. Burns, "The Caste War in the 1970's," and
An Epoch of Miracles, pp. 22-23, 71-72.
*(8) For a further discussion of the Ancient Word and its relation
to the preaching of God, see Dennis Tedlock, The Spoken Word and the
Work of Interpretation, chap. 12.
*(9) In holding open the possibility that the authors of the
alphabetic P.V. had access to the hieroglyphic version I am in
agreement with Munro S. Edmonson, The Book of Counsel: The Popol Vuh
of the Quiche Maya of Guatemala, pp. 6-7. For a discussion of the role
of dialogue in the Quiche story of the origin of the world and the
contrasting monologue of Genesis, see D. Tedlock, The Spoken Word,
chap. 11.
*(10) Contemporary Quiche daykeepers and their practices are fully
described in Barbara Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya. The
260-day cycle daykeepers divine by is made up of two shorter cycles,
one consisting of an endlessly repeating sequence of thirteen day
numbers and the other of an endlessly repeating sequence of twenty day
names. Since 13 and 20 have no common factor, the interaction of 13
numbers with 20 names produces a larger cycle consisting of 13 x 20 or
260 days, each with a unique combination of number and name. If we
begin with the day that combines the number 1 with the name Queh,
the list of successive days proceeds as follows:
QUICHE DAY NAMES WITH NUMBERS

Page 122 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

(Yucatec names in parentheses)
1 Queh
(Manik)
12 Tihax
(Etznab)
2 3anil (Lamat)
13 Cauuk
(Cauac)
3 Toh
(Muluc)
1 Hunahpu (Ahau)
4 4,ii
(Oc)
2 Imox
(Imix)
5 Ba4,
(Chuen)
3 I3
(Ik)
6E
(Eb)
4 A3abal (Akbal)
7 Ah
(Ben)
5 4at
(Kan)
8 Ix
(Ix)
6 Can
(Chicchan)
9 4,iquin (Men)
7 Came
(Cimi)
10 Ahmac (Cib)
8 Queh
(Manik)
11 Naoh
(Caban)
etc.
etc.
From 8 Queh the count goes on to 9 3anil, 10 Toh, and so forth,
returning to 1 Queh after 260 days.
Andres Xiloj, the daykeeper introduced in the preface to the present
work, insists that the period of human pregnancy is the basis for
the length of this cycle; medically speaking, 260 days is indeed a
sound, average figure for the period lasting from the time when a
woman first misses her menses to the time when she gives birth. It
should also be noted that the growth cycle of one of the varieties
of corn used in highland Guatemala is such that it is harvested 260
days after planting, though it is necessary to hasten the ripening
of the ears by bending the stalks over; see B. Tedlock, "Earth Rites
and Moon Cycles: Mayan Synodic and Sidereal Moon Reckoning."
*(11) For more on the ball game, see Theodore Stern, The Rubber-Ball
Games of the Americas, and Stephan F. de Borhegyi, The Pre-Columbian
Ballgames: A Pan-Mesoamerican Tradition.
*(12) For a full exploration of the astronomical dimensions of the
P.V., see D. Tedlock, "The Sowing and Dawning of All the Sky-Earth:
Astronomy in the Popol Vuh." The sources for the astronomical
identifications of Seven Macaw and Chimalmat are given under their
names in the Glossary. Claude Levi-Strauss states that the Big
Dipper is identified with the hurricane (rather than opposed to it) in
the mythology of Mesoamerica and the Caribbean (From Honey to Ashes,
pp. 115-16), but he bases this statement on the work of R.
Lehmann-Nitsche, who presents not a single concrete ethnographic
example of such an identification and even passes over evidence that
would place the stellar aspect of the hurricane close to the
ecliptic rather than near the pole star ("La constelacion de la Osa
Mayor y su concepto como Huracan o dios de la tormenta en la esfera
del Mar Caribe").
*(13) The symbolism of the Pleiades is discussed in B. Tedlock,
"Earth Rites and Moon Cycles." The sexual symbolism of the Zipacna
story was pointed out by Andres Xiloj, whose full comments will be
found in notes *(144)-*(152).
*(14) Together, Zipacna and Earthquake probably correspond to the
two-headed "Cauac monster" of classic Maya iconography (see Dicey
Taylor, "The Cauac Monster").
*(15) The falcon who serves as the messenger for Hurricane, or Heart

Page 123 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

of Sky, may correspond to the planet Jupiter, for reasons that are
given in D. Tedlock, "The Sowing and Dawning."
*(16) The Great Abyss at Carchah (see the Glossary) is probably near
the town of Coban; an independent colonial source on that region,
Bartolome de las Casas, has a god named Exbalanquen entering the
underworld through a cave near Coban (Apologetica historia de las
Indias, pp. 330, 619).
*(17) The movements of the messenger owls, here and elsewhere, fit
those of the planet Mercury; see D. Tedlock, "The Sowing and Dawning."
*(18) The Maya Venus cycle, as given in the Dresden Codex, is
discussed at length in Thompson, A Commentary on the Dresden Codex,
pp. 62-71. A given Venus cycle (lasting 584 days) is divided into four
stages, with Venus appearing as the morning star (for 236 days),
then disappearing (90 days), then reappearing as the evening star (250
days), and finally disappearing again (8 days). During a given 584-day
cycle the 20 day names will repeat fully 29 times, giving 580 days and
a remainder of 4; this means that a new Venus cycle will always
begin 4 days later in the sequence of 20 day names than the previous
cycle. And since 4 divides evenly into 20, giving 5, only 5 of the
20 day names can ever begin a Venus cycle. In the Dresden Codex the
chosen days (here given their Quiche names) were Hunahpu, 4at (or
"Net"), 3anil, E, and Ahmac, followed by Hunahpu again. Starting
from 1 Hunahpu (as the Dresden Codex does) and running through five
complete cycles so as to show all of the possible day names, the
beginning dates for the four stages within each Venus cycle work out
as follows:
DAY NUMBERS AND NAMES
FOR FIVE SUCCESSIVE VENUS CYCLES
FIRST
SECOND
THIRD
FOURTH
FIFTH
CYCLE
CYCLE
CYCLE
CYCLE
CYCLE
Appears as
morning star: 1 Hunahpu 13 4at 12 3anil 11 E
10 Ahmac
Becomes
invisible: 3 Ahmac 2 Hunahpu 1 4at
13 3anil 12 E
Appears as
evening star: 2 Came
1 4,ii 13 Ix
12 Tihax 11 13
Becomes
invisible: 5 Ahmac 4 Hunahpu 3 4at
2 3anil 1 E
After five complete cycles totaling 2,920 days, the movements of Venus
fill exactly 8 years of 365 days each and come within hours of filling
99 lunar months. At this point Venus is also close to completing 13 of
its sidereal periods, which run a little under 225 days each. In the
present context this means that when Venus begins its cycle for the
sixth time, an event that will fall on 9 Hunahpu, it will have the
same relationship to the fixed stars that it had 2,920 days earlier,
when its appearance as morning star began on 1 Hunahpu. The date for
this appearance will not return to 1 Hunahpu until all five of the
possible day names have combined with each of the 13 day numbers, by
which time Venus will have passed through precisely 65 cycles of 584

Page 124 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

days each, 104 cycles of 365 days each, and 146 cycles Of 260 days
each.
The divine names One and Seven Hunahpu and One and Seven Came (or
"Death") point directly to the Venus calendar, and specifically to the
first of its five cycles. Andres Xiloj pointed out that combining
the numbers 1 and 7 with a given day name is a conventional way of
indicating all 13 days bearing that name. The reason is that when
one traces a single day name through all of its occurrences in a given
260-day cycle, the accompanying numbers fall out in the sequence 1, 8,
2, 9, 3, 10, 4, 11, 5, 12, 6, 13, and 7. This means that if the divine
names in question here refer to astronomical events, these should be
events whose day names remain constant but whose day numbers are
variable, which is indeed the case. By the same argument, the names
One Ba4, (or "Monkey") and One Chouen (or "Artisan"), both of which
refer to the same day (see the Glossary), point to an event that
varies neither as to number nor as to name and must therefore occur
each 260 days or a multiple thereof. The only astronomical events that
fit this description are those pertaining to Mars, whose synodic
period is 780 (3 x 260) days. For example, if Mars made its first
appearance in a given cycle on the day 1 Ba4, the return of this
same event would again fall on the day 1 Ba4,.
*(19) The falcon who serves as the messenger for Xmucane may
correspond to the planet Saturn, for reasons that are given in D.
Tedlock, "The Sowing and Dawning."
*(20) It was Andres Xiloj who pointed out that the ritual
performed with the ears of corn in the P.V. is the same as a
contemporary ritual; his detailed comments on this and other
connections between the P.V. and contemporary practices may be found
throughout the notes to the P.V. translation itself. For an account of
contemporary sound plays on day names, see B. Tedlock, "Sound
Texture and Metaphor in Quiche Maya Ritual Language," and Time and the
Highland Maya, chap. 5.
*(21) The macaw's tail and the two fireflies that glowed all night
may correspond to the stars Procyon, Castor, and Pollux, for reasons
that are given in D. Tedlock, "The Sowing and Dawning."
*(22) Ideally there should be a total of five test houses,
corresponding to the second stage in each of the five types of Venus
cycles; these would be Dark House, Razor House, Cold (or Rattling)
House, Jaguar House, and Bat House. They may correspond to locations
along the Mayan zodiac, since Venus begins to repeat the pattern of
its relationship to the fixed stars after five cycles. In the second
of two passages naming the houses, the P.V. seems to add a sixth
house, a "house of fire," but this may be a secondary elaboration on
the part of the narrator [see note *(286)].
*(23) In a given 365-day period the 20 day names repeat themselves
completely 18 times, giving 360 days with a remainder of 5; this means
that the next solar year will always begin with a day name that
comes 5 days later in the cycle of 20 than the name that began the
previous year. And since 5 divides evenly into 20, giving 4, only 4 of

Page 125 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

the 20 day names, evenly spaced within the name cycle, can ever
begin a solar year. For the Quiche, these new year's day names were
and are Queh or "Deer," E or "Tooth," Naoh or "Thought," and I3 or
"Wind," followed by Queh again. As for the new year's day number,
the cycle of 13 numbers repeats itself completely 28 times in a
given solar year, giving 364 days and a remainder of 1; this means
that a given solar year will always begin with a day number that comes
a single place later in the cycle of 13 than the number that began the
previous year.
The year as a whole is designated by the number and name of its
beginning day; starting with a year bearing the name 1 Queh, the
reckoning of successive years proceeds as follows:
QUICHE YEAR DESIGNATIONS
1 Queh
6E
11 Naoh
2E
7 Naoh
12 I3
3 Naoh
8 I3
13 Queh
4 I3
9 Queh
1E
5 Queh
10 E
etc.
Note that two of these day names, E and I3, also have a potential
for events pertaining to Venus (see the Venus calendar in an earlier
note). They occur in the fourth and (more markedly) in the fifth and
final cycle of Venus, just as the solar dimension of the story of
Hunahpu and Xbalanque begins to manifest itself in the final episodes.
*(24) In Mesoamerican iconography the evening-star Venus is a
death's head (see Carlson, "The Grolier Codex"). Even the ball game
played with the squash fits into place when we consider the report
of Ruth Bunzel that in at least one contemporary Quiche town, an
excess of large squashes in a field means that the senior male of a
family may die, since the squashes are a sign that his head is rotting
(Chichicastenango, p. 54). The vine shown growing out of the head of a
ballplayer in one of the ball-court relief panels at Chichen Itza
may well be a squash vine; note that the ball in this panel is shown
as enclosing a skull (see illustration: "It's just a skull").
The morning-star and evening-star episodes should total five each,
corresponding to the five types of Venus cycles. The morning-star
episodes are brought up to five if we count the period when One and
Seven Hunahpu were on the surface of the earth as the first episode,
with the four above-ground adventures of Hunahpu and Xbalanque
following. The first evening-star episode is of course the one in
which One Hunahpu's head is placed in the tree at the Place of Ball
Game Sacrifice, followed by the three ball games with literal or
figurative heads; the fifth head will be Hunahpu's again, when he
loses it in a future episode.
*(25) The appearance of Hunahpu and Xbalanque as catfish recalls
that the purported equivalent of Hunahpu among the classic Maya, the
god designated G-I in the epigraphic literature on Palenque, has
cheeks with appendages that sometimes look like catfish barbels and
sometimes like spiny fins [see Floyd G. Lounsbury, "The Identities
of the Mythological Figures in the 'Cross Group' Inscriptions at

Page 126 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Palenque," and notes *(306)-*(307)]. The appearance of the twins as
vagabond actors is a further sign, beyond the earlier appearance of
the "old man" or possum, that the sun will soon rise. Among the
roles of classic Maya year-bearers was that of wandering actors
(Thompson, Maya History and Religion, p. 277).
*(26) The similarities between the sun and full moon were also
pointed out by the Aztecs (Bernardino de Sahagun, Florentine Codex,
Book 7, p. 3).
*(27) Contemporary Quiche mother-fathers are discussed in B.
Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya, pp. 74-85.
*(28) For a general discussion of the subject of Tollan, see Nigel
Davies, The Toltecs, chap. 2. Tulan (Tulapan in Yucatec sources) and
Zuyua (often Holtun Zuyua in Yucatec sources) are mentioned in various
Mayan alphabetic writings, including Recinos et al., The Annals of the
Cakchiquels, pp. 44-53; Ralph L. Roys, The Book of Chilam Balam of
Chumayel, pp. 74, 132, 139, 153; and Eugene R. Craine and Reginald
C. Reindorp, The Codex Perez and the Book of Chilam Balam of Mani, pp.
80, 138, 166, 167.
From a Yucatec point of view (see the Chumayel book), Holtun Zuyua
occupied the western position in a four-directional group of towns
whose leaders converged on Chichen Itza (a fifth and central town)
in order to receive lordship; it may have been at the place now
known as Puerto Escondido in Campeche (Thompson, Maya History and
Religion, p. 23), though Edmonson (without giving any evidence)
locates it near Motul in Yucatan (The Ancient Future of the Itza:
The Book of Chilam Balam of Tizimin, p. 38). As for Tulapan, that
was the place where the Tutul Xiu lineage traced its origins; it was
even farther west than Zuyua (according to the Mani book), which could
mean that it was the primary Toltecan Tollan near Mexico City. The
Cakchiquel book uses the name Tulan in this narrow sense when it has
the Quiches and Cakchiquels coming to Zuyua from a western Tulan,
but it also uses the name in a broader sense that takes in the Yucatec
system of directional towns, speaking of a Tulan for each of the
four directions and of a convergence on what appears to be a central
Tulan. In effect, the authors of the P.V. apply the name Tulan
specifically to the western town in the Yucatec system, producing
the name Tulan Zuyua. When they say Tulan Zuyua is in the "east," they
are reckoning its position not in the context of the Yucatec system
but relative to the Tulan or Tulapan that is west of Zuyua in the Mani
and Cakchiquel books.
*(29) The main cave at Teotihuacan and its relationship to a Nahua
tradition concerning seven caves are discussed by Doris Heyden in
"An Interpretation of the Cave Underneath the Pyramid of the Sun in
Teotihuacan, Mexico." The existence of a god named Tahil at Palenque
and his relationship to Tohil have been pointed out by Linda Schele
(Notebook for the Maya Hieroglyphic Writing Workshop, p. 114) and
Floyd G. Lounsbury (personal communication). For more on the Yaqui see
the Glossary; they are not to be confused with the Yaqui tribe of
Sonora and Arizona.

Page 127 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(30) The reference to the body of water crossed by the Quiche
forefathers as a "sea" is a hyperbole; it is called both a "lake"
and a "sea" in "Historia Quiche de don Juan de Torres," in Recinos,
Cronicas indigenas de Guatemala pp. 24-25. The causeways at
Potonchan and Tixchel are noted in France V. Scholes and Ralph L.
Roys, The Maya Chontal Indians of Acalan-Tixchel, p. 81.
*(31) For more on the Zaki 4oxol or "White Sparkstriker," see the
Glossary and B. Tedlock, "El C'oxol: un simbolo de la resistencia
quiche a la conquista espiritual."
*(32) In Quiche theory, at least, the reckoning of the 260-day cycle
should have been in synchrony everywhere in Mesoamerica. We do know
that Cuauhtemoc, the successor of Moctezuma, surrendered the city of
Tenochtitlan to Hernan Cortes on an Aztec day whose name means "One
Snake," falling on August 13, 1521, on the Julian calendar
(Thompson, Maya Hieroglyphic Writing, p. 303). Tracing the
contemporary Quiche calendar back to that same Julian date, we come to
a day whose Quiche name, Hun Can, also means "One Snake." In other
words, when it was One Snake in Tenochtitlan, it was One Snake a
thousand road miles away in the town of Quiche. Lounsbury argues, in
"The Base of the Venus Table of the Dresden Codex," for a lowland Maya
calendar correlation that would move the classic Maya 260-day cycle
two days out of synchrony with the Quiche and Aztec calendars, but the
astronomical basis of his argument could easily be two days off,
according to the astronomer John B. Carlson (personal communication).
*(33) If the Quiches timed their attacks on their rivals in the same
way as the classic lowland Maya, they favored periods when Venus was
the evening star (see Lounsbury, "Astronomical Knowledge and Its
Uses at Bonampak, Mexico"). The "road" onto which they rolled the head
of a sacrifice victim may have been symbolic of the zodiacal path
within which Venus is confined, and the head may have been thought
of on the model of the severed heads that appeared as the evening-star
Venus in the story of Hunahpu and Xbalanque and their fathers.
*(34) It took 52 years of 365 days each for all four
year-beginning day names to occur in combination with all thirteen day
numbers (4 x 13 = 52). The seniority given by the Quiche to Queh or
"Deer" among the year-beginning day names is noted in B. Tedlock, Time
and the Highland Maya, p. 99.
*(35) Alternative accounts of the names and generational positions
of the Quiches who went on the pilgrimage, and of the titles that were
given to them, may be found in Adrian Recinos et al., Title of the
Lords of Totonicapan, pp. 176-79. Tulan, the place where the Quiche
founding fathers had spent some time in an earlier episode, may have
been left completely empty by the time they and the other tribes
mentioned in the P.V. had departed from it. In the Quiche language the
word for this place, in the form tolan, came to figure in such phrases
as tolanic tinamit, "abandoned city," and tolan ha, "dark, uninhabited
house" (B.).
*(36) A long list of the citadels settled by the Quiches between
Hacauitz and Thorny Place is given in Recinos et al., Title of the

Page 128 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Lords of Totonicapan, pp. 180-83. For a description of Thorny Place,
now known as Cauinal (the name given to one of its four divisions in
the P.V.), see John W. Fox, Quiche Conquest: Centralism and
Regionalism in Highland Guatemalan State Development pp. 243-50, and
Alain Ichon, "Arqueologia y etnohistoria en Cawinal."
*(37) For a full discussion of the buildings of 3umarakah (Rotten
Cane) or Utatlan (the Nahua name for the same place), see Carmack, The
Quiche Mayas, chap. 9.
*(38) The military exploits of Quicab are discussed in Carmack,
The Quiche Mayas, pp. 134-37. The citadels that made up the town of
Quiche, in addition to Rotten Cane, were Bearded Place to the south,
which now belonged to the Tams; Mukuitz Pilocab to the north,
belonging to the Ilocs; and Resguardo, or Atalaya, to the east,
whose Quiche name and lineage affiliation are unknown (Carmack, The
Quiche Mayas, chap. 8).
*(39) For the full story of Alvarado's conquest of the Quiche
kingdom, which was resisted by a large military force, see Victoria
Reifler Bricker, The Indian Christ, the Indian King, pp. 39-41. The
events at Rotten Cane itself are further described in Carmack, The
Quiche Mayas, pp. 143-47. According to Spanish sources, Three Deer and
Nine Dog were burned at the stake and it was Tecum and Tepepul who
were hanged.
*(40) In dating the writing of the alphabetic P.V., I follow
Recinos, Popol Vuh, pp. 22-23. For a description of titulos
contemporary with the P.V., see Carmack, Quichean Civilization, pp.
19-71. The calculations correlating a year-beginning day bearing the
name One Deer with June 2, 1558 (Julian) are my own. The fact that a
calendrical event of the same kind fell on April 10, 1818 (Gregorian),
may help explain why the years 1816 to 1820 saw a Quiche revolt
against tribute payments to the Spanish crown, climaxing in the
coronation of Atinasio Tzul, the mayor of Totonicapan, as King of
the Quiches. For a description of this revolt see Bricker, The
Indian Christ, chap. 7.
*(41) For more on the Spanish journey of Juan Cortes and the warning
sent to Philip II, see Pedro Carrasco, "Don Juan Cortes, cacique de
Santa Cruz Quiche."
*(42) The lineal descendants of Juan de Rojas and Juan Cortes
continued to litigate well into the eighteenth century. The Cortes
line died out by 1788; the de Rojas line still lives, but its
members lost all remaining vestiges of their lordly privileges with
the coming of liberal reforms in 1801 (Carmack, The Quiche Mayas,
pp. 321, 362).
*(43) In translating the nim chocohib of the P.V. as "Great
Toastmasters" or "Great Conveners of Banquets" I take my cue from
Ximenez, who has "grandes combites" (Popol Vuh, p. 265); see also
Great Toastmaster in the Glossary. For more on contemporary
matchmakers (or "road guides"), see B. Tedlock, Time and the
Highland Maya, pp. 74, 110, 117, 156.
*(44) The name Cristobal Velasco may be found in Recinos et al.,

Page 129 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Title of the Lords of Totonicapan, p. 195.
*(45) The Dresden Codex page that begins an otherwise torn-off
section is discussed in Thompson, A Commentary on the Dresden Codex,
pp. 78-80.
*(46) My discussion of the Palenque inscriptions is based on
lectures given by Linda Schele in the spring of 1984; their contents
are partially available in Schele, Notebook for the Maya
Hieroglyphic Writing Workshop at Texas.
*(47) For more on the dialectical nature of Quiche thought see B.
Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya, pp. 145-46, 176-77. The role of
myth in Mayan thinking about history is explored by Bricker in The
Indian Christ, chaps. 1 and 14.
POPOL VUH
PART ONE
*(48) the beginning: This is uxe, literally "its base" or "root"; it
is as if the writers were starting at the bottom of something vertical
and working their way up.
*(49) this place called Quiche: That "Quiche" is meant as a place
name here is confirmed at the very end of the P.V.: "everything has
been completed here concerning Quiche, which is now named Santa Cruz."
See the Glossary for more on Quiche and Santa Cruz.
*(50) And here: The paragraphing of the present translation is
largely based on two considerations. The first is the occurrence of
what Dell Hymes calls "initial particles" ("In Vain I Tried to Tell
You", pp. 318-20). Examples in Quiche are are 4ut, "And here" (or "And
this is"); 4ate 4ut, "And next"; and quehe 4ut, "And so." The second
consideration is the occurrence of quotations. In contemporary
Quiche speech there are deliberate pauses both before and after
phrases consisting of initial particles, and immediately before
quotations. For more details, see D. Tedlock, The Spoken Word, chap.
4, and "Hearing a Voice in an Ancient Text."
*(51) how things were put in shadow and brought to light: This is
euaxibal zaquiribal [zakiribal], "being-hidden-instrument
becoming-light-instrument." The first word is built on a passive
(-x) form of euah, which V. glosses as "to hide" but then explains
that it has to do with shadows or dark places. The second word is
built on an inchoative (-ir) form of zak, "be light," which it
shares with zakiric, "to dawn." The two words together describe the
activities of the gods at a very general level. As will be seen, the
gods not only bring things to light but can also darken what was
once in the light.
On the other hand, the two words could also be translated as "the
hiding place, the dawning place," since -bal can either be
instrumental or indicate place. The "hiding place" would be euabal
ziuan or "Concealment Canyon" (see Glossary), where the gods were
hidden away before the dawn; the "dawning place" would be the place
(or places) where the founding ancestors of the ruling Quiche lineages
were keeping vigil when the morning star and then the sun rose for the
first time, places which are referred to as zaquiribal [zakribal.]

Page 130 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(52) the midwife, matchmaker: This is iyom, mamom. Andres Xiloj
immediately identified iyom as the modern term for "midwife" (yom is
given the same meaning in B.). He knew of mamom only as a term
addressed to a matchmaker in the ceremonial language of a bride-asking
ceremony; ordinarily the matchmaker is referred to as 4amal be,
"road guide."
*(53) defender, protector: This is matzanel chuquenel. B. lists
matzanel (under matzo) as "defender," which fits the role of the
Quiche daykeeper as the maker of prayers and offerings on behalf of
clients. As Andres Xiloj pointed out, the daykeeper who takes this
role today may be called, among other things, by the Spanish word
abogado, "lawyer, advocate," and may be thought of as presenting the
case of the client before a divine tribunal. The translation of
chuquenel rests on the entry in B. for chukonal (under chu3u),
"protector." The two terms are very similar in their root senses;
for matzo, B. gives "to shelter after the manner of a hen," and for
chu3u, "to cover over."
*(54) as enlightened beings, in enlightened words: "Enlightened"
is my translation, for the present context, of zaquil [zakil],
"lightness" or "whiteness." This insistence that the aforementioned
Quiche deities and their words have the properties of light is
directly juxtaposed to a mention of God and Christendom in the
sentence that follows; it can thus be read as a direct and
deliberate contradiction of the missionary teaching that the
pre-Conquest gods were all devils.
*(55) amid the preaching of God, in Christendom now: After the
Dios and christianoil in this phrase, there will be no more Spanish or
Spanish-derived words until Part Five of the present translation
[see note *(471) for the lord bishop]. The "preaching" is 4habal,
literally "manner of speaking" or just plain "talk"; the phrase
u4habal Dios, "talk of God," came to be the standard Quiche way of
referring to Christian doctrine and is still used in that sense by
both Quiches and missionaries, but the original choice of these
words to translate "la palabra de Dios" must have been made by a
Quiche rather than a missionary. The proper Quiche term for an
authoritative and abiding "word" was and still is tzih rather than
4habal; the writers of the P.V. refer to their own manuscript as
containing oher tzih, "the Ancient Word," but neither they nor
contemporary Quiches use tzih as a way of referring to "la palabra
de Dios." In choosing to translate u4habal Dios as "the preaching of
God" in the present context, I have tried to combine the "Christian
doctrine" sense of this phrase with the more general sense of 4habal
as an act of speaking.
*(56) a place to see it: The original pre-Columbian P.V. is referred
to here and much later as an ilbal re (written ibal re in the later
place), "an instrument (or place) for the seeing of something." What
was "seen" there included "how things were put in shadow and brought
to light" by the gods, together with future events such as war, death,
famine, and quarrels. B. has an entry for ilbal re (under ilo) glossed

Page 131 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

redundantly as "figura de dibujos," which could variously mean
"figure," "drawing," and even "picture." Today ilbal or ilobal
(without the re) refers to crystals used for gazing by diviners and to
eyeglasses, binoculars, and telescopes.
*(57) There is the original book and ancient writing, but he who
reads and ponders it hides his face: Edmonson is correct in
interpreting the phrase eual uuach, "hidden his-face," as pertaining
to the reader of the P.V. rather than to the book itself (The Book
of Counsel, p. 7). "There is" is my translation of 4o; some
translators have used the past tense here, the usual treatment for
Quiche verbs inflected for the complete aspect, but that would call
for x4o. "He who reads" translates ilol, literally "one who sees."
B. gives ilol as "seer" or "prophet," and ilol uuh (literally "book
seer") as "reader"; an English translation built on "read" does
quite well at covering the full range of ilol, since "read" still
retains divinatory usages that go all the way back to its Germanic
root. "[He who] ponders" translates bizol, an agentive form of biz,
"sad" or "pensive." The emotional dimension of bizol is made quite
clear in later passages, where we hear again and again how the
Quiche forefathers wept at the thought of having left the mythic
city of Tulan and having become separated from other tribes.
*(58) performance: This is my translation of peoxic, which I read as
a passive and nominalized form of peyoh, "to hire" (V.), probably
meaning something like "service rendered."
*(59) the fourfold siding, fourfold cornering, / measuring, fourfold
staking, / halving the cord, stretching the cord / in the sky, on
the earth, / the four sides, the four corners: The "fourfold siding"
and "cornering" are ucah tzucuxic and ucah xucutaxic; the "four sides"
and "four corners" are cah tzuc and cah xucut. Xucut was and is
"corner," and cah xucut is still in use as a way of referring to the
four directions, most frequently in prayers in the line, cah xucut
cah, cah xucut uleu, "four corners of sky, four corners of earth."
Tzuc is more difficult to translate. Andres Xiloj suggested "sides" on
the basis of context. B. gives cahzuc as "a square thing," and
although he gives cahxucut as a synonym for cahzuc under the entry for
the latter, he elsewhere glosses cahxucut as "four angles of the
world." The notion that tzuc means "side" in the present context, in
contrast with "corner" or "angle," is based on zu3u-, "to go somewhere
straight, without straying" (B.), and on zu4um, "straight" (X.). Under
zucube, which would mean "straight (direct) road," B. lists tzucu be
as an alternative spelling; this supports the relationship between the
tzuc of the P.V., with its tz, and the dictionary entries for zu3
and zu4um with their z.
The "fourfold staking" is ucah cheexic; Andres Xiloj understood this
to be four sticks or poles driven in the ground at the four corners.
The "measuring" is retaxic, literally "its-being-measured," translated
on the basis of etah, "to measure, to mark out" (B.), and the
reading offered by don Andres. The measuring in this passage is done
according to a unit still in use among the Quiche, the 4aam or

Page 132 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

"cord" (a length of rope). Don Andres was familiar with the
phraseology used here, umeh camaxic [4aamaxic], "its-folded
cording," and uyuc camaxic [uyuk 4aamaxic], "its-stretched cording."
He explained that the "folded" measurement is done with the cord
folded back upon itself to halve its length, and that the
"stretched" measurement is done with the cord pulled out to its full
length. His reading of 4aamaxic (which has a passive ending) is
confirmed by an entry in B., caamaah (with an active ending), "to
measure lands." He observed that the P.V. describes the measuring
out of the sky and earth as if a cornfield were being laid out for
cultivation. The Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel also describes the
setting up of the earth and sky as an act of measurement, carried
out not only in space (by footsteps in this case) but in time (through
twenty consecutive days from the 260-day divinatory cycle) (Roys,
The Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel, pp. 116-118). The Chumayel
document makes a passing reference to a celestial cord (p. 155);
Yucatec Mayas near Valladolid told Alfred M. Tozzer that a cord
suspended in the sky once linked Tulum and Coba with Chichen Itza
and Uxmal (A Comparative Study of the Mayas and Lacandones, p. 153).
The present passage offers one of the clearest examples of
parallel verse structure in the P.V.; it may be scanned as follows:
ucah tzucuxic,
fourfold siding,
ucah xucutaxic
fourfold cornering,
retaxic,
measuring,
ucah cheexic,
fourfold staking,
umeh camaxic,
halving the cord,
uyuc camaxic
stretching the cord
upa cah,
in the sky,
upa uleu
on the earth,
cah tzuc
the four sides,
cah xucut
the four corners
Note that the first two lines actually form a quatrain, with a
slight variation in the third part; such quatrains occur elsewhere
in the P.V. and in Yucatec texts as well (see D. Tedlock, The Spoken
Word, chap. 8). Edmonson presented the entire P.V. in couplets (The
Book of Counsel), ignoring triplets, quatrains, and passages in
which the horizontal movement of prose strongly modifies the
vertical movement of parallelism [see note *(70)]. In the present work
I have chosen a verse format only where the parallelism is both
strongly marked and sustained.
In contemporary Quiche discourse with parallelism like that of the
passage under discussion, the formation of lines in oral delivery
would depend on considerations of audience. If this were a prayer
meant only for the ears of the gods and if the wording were well known
to the speaker, the whole thing might be run off on a single breath,
with the end of each phrase marked by a slight drop in pitch. In a
slower rendition meant to be heard by humans, or near the beginning of
a performance, there might be a pause after each of the lines as
they are given in the translation, though the opening quatrain might

Page 133 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

well be run together as a single spoken line rather than divided
between two lines (see D. Tedlock, "Hearing a Voice"). In any case,
the two parts of a couplet are seldom divided between lines.
*(60) giver of heart, ... upbringer: These are respectively 4uxlanel
and 4uxlaay, both built on the stern 4ux, "heart," which in its
4uxla-forms has to do with thought in the sense of "memory" and
"will." Andres Xiloj defined 4uxlanel as follows: "One who raises us
and has a good reputation for doing this." In the translation I have
tried to preserve the full range of 4uxla- by staying literal for
its first occurrence ("giver of heart") and translating for sense
the second time around ("upbringer").
*(61) in the light that lasts: Here I have tried to preserve in
English the relationship that exists between the corresponding words
of the text, zaquil amaquil [zakil ama3el]. These two Quiche words are
linked by assonance and alliteration, giving them a parallel sound,
but they are not properly parallel in their morphology- in fact, the
latter word modifies the former. Zakil is composed of zak, an
adjective meaning "light" or "white," and -il, which makes it into
an abstract noun; ama3el, on the other hand, whether in classical or
modern Quiche, is a unitary, unanalyzable form (at least where
proper morphology is concerned). As an adverb it means "always" or
"all the time"; as an adjective it means "continuous" or "eternal." In
rendering zakil ama3el as "the light that lasts," I change parts of
speech as the original phrase does (though not in precisely the same
way), while at the same time linking the two halves of the phrase
through alliteration.
*(62) Now it still ripples, now it still murmurs, ripples, it
still sighs, still hums, and it is empty: The full sound pattern of
this passage can only be fully appreciated in the original; I have
corrected ca to 4a, -oc to -ok, and tzini- and tzino- to 4,ini- and
4,ino-: 4a ca4,ininok, 4a cachamamok ca4,inonic, 4a cazilanic, 4a
calolinic, catolona puch. 4a is "still, yet"; ca- is the incomplete
aspect; and -ok has the effect of "now"; nevertheless, translators
have generally put this passage in the past tense! What we are hearing
here is the performer's effort to make the primordial state of the
world present for his listeners, setting a scene rather than
recounting a past event; the mood is a lyric rather than a
historical one.
Translators have rendered the first five verbs here with
adjectives like "quiet" or "silent"; the problems with such a
treatment only begin with the fact that the Quiche words in question
are, after all, verbs and not adjectives. To translate these verbs
as referring to mere silence and the like misses the fact that the
stems 4,inin-, chamam-, 4,inon-, and lolin- all contain
reduplicative alliteration (together with reduplicative assonance in
two cases) and are therefore onomatopoeic. Colonial and modern
dictionary entries for the stems of this passage do indeed include
some of the glosses translators have chosen, but B. gives "ring" for
4,ino-, and V. explains that zilan- (under zilee) refers to the

Page 134 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

(audible) process through which windy weather is calmed. Further,
Andres Xiloj identifies lolin- as the standard Quiche way of rendering
the sound of a cricket. In translating this passage I have chosen
quiet sounds that can be expressed as verbs; my "ripples" are
derived from the fact that there is nothing but sky and water in
this opening scene, as will be seen further on; for the same reason
I have avoided obvious animal sounds. The "quiet" in question here
is not so much a complete silence as it is a "hush" (note the
onomatopoeic quality of this English word), the kinds of sounds one
hears when there are no other sounds- or in this case, the "white
noise" of the primordial world itself.
*(63) the first eloquence: Ximenez translates uchan as
"eloquence," the same gloss given it by B. (under the entry for chan).
*(64) It is at rest; not a single thing stirs: Some translators have
made the first half of this sentence negative by joining it to the
negative clause that precedes it, but in fact what we have here is the
last in a series of three sentences with the same positive-negative
clause structure. The negativity of the second clause of the present
sentence is marked by hunta, "not one thing" (B.), which is not to
be confused with hutak, "each one." The entire sentence is perfectly
intelligible, just as it is, in modern Quiche; Andres Xiloj gave it
the same reading I have.
*(65) It is held back: This is camal cabantah, which is difficult to
translate. I find my clue in the entry for camalo in B., which is
glossed "late, not quick"; the entire phrase might be read as, "it
is made to be late (or slow)."
*(66) a glittering light: This is zactetoh [zaktetoh], which B.
glosses as "the brightness that enters through cracks." If this is the
central meaning of this word rather than an illustrative example, then
the light in question must be escaping between the feathers with which
the Bearers and Begetters are covered (see the next two sentences).
Note that the first light in the primordial scene is not up in the
sky, but down at (or in) the level of the water. Its "glittering"
corresponds, in the sensory domain of light, to the soft and
repetitive nature of the primordial sounds described earlier.
*(67) in their very being: This is chiqui4oheic,
"at-their-being-there." I have translated it as "in their very
being" because the writers of the P.V., wherever they add chiqui4oheic
(or a similar form based on 4oheic) to a statement in which the verb
"to be" is already present or understood, are making a pointedly
ontological statement. Some translators have softened the
ontological abstractness of these statements by using such phrases
as "by their nature," but 4oheic has no aura of the natal or the
biological hanging about it the way "nature" does, and in fact I
know of no Quiche concept that corresponds to "nature." If I were
translating 4oheic into German, I would choose Dasein.
*(68) the name of the god: The word I have translated as "god"
here is cabauil [4abauil]. The primary reference of 4abauil, through
most of the P.V., is to the patron deities of the ruling Quiche

Page 135 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

lineages and to the sacred stones that were the material embodiments
of these deities. But the present passage- given that 4abauil is
linked specifically to the Heart of Sky, and given that the Heart of
Sky will shortly hereafter be described as a trinity- must be read
as an allusion to Christian teachings. Note carefully that when the
passage is read literally rather than as an allusion, it contains
nothing that directly contradicts indigenous Quiche theology; Heart of
Sky is among the names uttered before 4abauil stones in a prayer given
much later. For a general discussion of biblical allusions in the
P.V., see D. Tedlock, The Spoken Word, chap. 11.
Looking into the etymology of 4abauil, we find 4ab, "to have the
mouth open"- for example, in admiration and in death (V.). B. and T.
have caba, "to open," with the mouth given as an example. 4abauil,
then, could mean something like "open-mouthed." The ancient stone
4abauil were given drinks of sacrificed blood through their mouths;
their modern counterparts in the eastern Quiche area, called
4amauil, are given drinks of liquor (and sometimes chicken blood)
through their mouths.
*(69) in the early dawn: This phrase constitutes the P.V.'s first
allusion to the day names of the 260-day divinatory calendar.
Instead of the ordinary word for "early dawn," a3abil, the text has
a3abal, an archaic form that is also the proper name of a day. Like
other day names, A3abal is often given a divinatory interpretation
by means of sound play, and one of the words used to play on it
today is in fact a3abil, an allusion to the fact that the rituals
scheduled for days named A3abal are best carried out during the time
of day known as a3abil. The rituals in question, appropriately enough,
involve the first steps toward the negotiation of new social
relationships that will last a lifetime (B. Tedlock, Time and the
Highland Maya, pp. 77-81). One A3abal is an appropriate day for a
daykeeper with the office of mother-father to go to the pair of
shrines dedicated to the welfare of the human inhabitants of the lands
of his patrilineage, in order to discuss (in prayer) the fact that a
family in his lineage wishes to propose a marriage between one of
its young men and a woman from another lineage. A later day named
A3abal may be chosen for the making of the actual proposal at the
house of the prospective bride.
On One, Eight, and Nine A3abal a mother-father who has taken on
the responsibility of training and installing the successor of his
deceased counterpart in a neighboring lineage will go to the shrines
of that lineage to discuss the fact that one of its members wishes
to become its new mother-father. In both the marriage and the
installation the negotiation has two levels: it is not only the living
who must give their approval to the bond between husband and wife or
between the new mother-father and the foundation shrines (which is
thought of as a spiritual marriage), but the ancestors and the gods.
In the case of the Heart of Sky's discussion with the Sovereign Plumed
Serpent in the P.V., the problem is a more fundamental one. When, by
their joint efforts (and those of other gods) they eventually

Page 136 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

succeed in making four different mother-fathers, each of them
married to one of four different women, these will be the first
human mother-fathers and the first human married couples who ever
existed.
*(70) He spoke with the Sovereign Plumed Serpent.... they joined
their words, their thoughts: This passage offers an example of what
happens when the Quiche tendency to parallel verse is modified by
the forward thrust of prose (see D. Tedlock, "Hearing a Voice"). The
result is a diagonal trajectory:
xchau ru4 ri tepeu 4ucumatz
xe4ha cut, ta xenaohinic
ta xebizonic,
xerico quib
xquicuch quitzih
quinaoh
He spoke with the Sovereign Plumed Serpent,
and they talked, then they thought,
then they worried.
They agreed with each other,
they joined their words,
their thoughts.
It is passages such as this that move the action forward in
narratives, with the balance sometimes swinging more toward the
verticality of verse than in the present example and sometimes more
toward the horizontality of prose. The more a passage in
contemporary Quiche discourse swings toward this horizontality the
less predictable- and, potentially, the more dramatic- its pauses
become, except for the paragraphing discussed in note *(50). As in the
present case, I have kept such passages in a prose format in the
translation proper.
*(71) the generation: This is uinaquiric [uinakiric]. Others have
translated this as "creation," but it has to do with such processes as
the seasonal rising of springs in places that would otherwise be
dry, and the growth or formation of algae or larvae in still water
(V.). The word "creation" is too heavily laden with an implied
ontological priority of the spiritual over the material to be imported
into the present account of origins, which contains no word quite like
it.
*(72) Thunderbolt Hurricane comes first, the second is Newborn
Thunderbolt, and the third is Raw Thunderbolt: There may be an
allusion to the Christian trinity here, but the pre-Columbian Quiche
pantheon did include at least one trinity, whether that trinity was
the same as the present Thunderbolt trinity or not. The principal gods
(4abauil) of the ruling Quiche lineages are listed again and again
as Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz, though there is occasional mention
of a fourth god. The P.V. never directly links the three
Thunderbolts with the three lineage gods, but it is at least
suggestive that the dwelling place of the latter threesome is
described as shrouded in a rainstorm.

Page 137 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

On the basis of fieldwork, Barbara Tedlock and I can confirm
Lowy's report that cakulha not only is the Quiche term for thunderbolt
but is also the Quiche name for the Amanita muscaria mushroom (Bernard
Lowy, "Amanita muscaria and the Thunderbolt Legend in Guatemala and
Mexico," p. 189). We must hasten to add that although Quiches are
indeed what Gordon Wasson would call "mycophiles" rather than
"mycophobes"- they are very fond of the Amanita caesaria, for examplethey generally regard the muscaria as a poisonous species best
avoided. But we cannot rule out the possible presence of a muscaria
cult in the P.V., whether in the form of a symbolic residue of
something long past or a highly coded allusion to something still
under way at the time Europeans first arrived, nor can we rule out the
use of muscaria by some present-day highland Guatemalan shamans.
As to the stone and pottery mushroom effigies discovered in
Guatemalan archaeological sites (Stephan F. de Borhegyi,
"Pre-Columbian Pottery Mushrooms from Mesoamerica"), these pertain
to the hot Pacific lowlands rather than to the high, cool evergreen
forests where the muscaria grows, and there is the further problem
that the ruling Quiche lineages trace their origins to the Gulf
coast rather than the Pacific. Moreover, de Borhegyi dates the
effigies no later than a thousand years ago, leaving a gap of
several centuries before the Quiche kingdom expanded into the
Pacific lowlands during the reign of Quicab. Of all the arguments
for a mushroom cult among the highland Maya the archaeological one
is the weakest.
The case for Amanita muscaria in the P.V. itself is somewhat
stronger, though we must begin from the fact that mushrooms as such
are never mentioned. Far beyond the present passage there occur the
words holom ocox, literally "head of a mushroom," translated there
as "yarrow", but Duncan MacLean Earle ("La etnoecologia quiche en el
Popol Vuh") has found this to be the Quiche term for a common herb,
named (like a great many other Quiche plants and mushrooms) for its
resemblance to an anatomical part of another biological species (see
yarrow in the Glossary). What is more, the holom ocox of the P.V. is
not eaten but rather burned as incense, along with another common herb
called iya (see marigold in the Glossary); according to Earle, both
these herbs are still used as incense today in the region east of
Santa Cruz Quiche, and Andres Xiloj attested the use of iya in
Momostenango. The flowers of iya are yellow and those of holom ocox
are white; the P.V. mentions the two plant names in this same order,
which fits with the yellow/white order of corn colors in the P.V.
and the color pairings in the couplets of contemporary prayers (see B.
Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya, Appendix B).
Whatever the problems with finding a clear reference to mushrooms in
the P.V., the evidence for the Amanita muscaria is not limited to
the fact that cakulha could refer both to a literal thunderbolt and to
the mushroom named for the thunderbolt. First of all, the stipe of a
mushroom (like the trunk of a tree) is called rakan, "its leg," in
Quiche, and of course a mushroom with a stipe has only one "leg,"

Page 138 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

which recalls that the name translated "Thunderbolt Hurricane" here
could also be glossed as "One-legged Thunderbolt" (see Hurricane in
the Glossary). This leaves the way open to the muscaria but does not
settle the matter, since there are plenty of literal thunderbolts that
also have a single "leg." The rawness (or freshness) and
youthfulness ascribed to the cakulha in the P.V. work in the same way:
there could be an allusion to the suddenness of the growth of
mushrooms, but these same qualities are also possessed by
thunderbolts.
The single most suggestive bit of evidence for the mushroom theory
lies in the fact that a later P.V. passage gives Newborn Thunderbolt
and Raw Thunderbolt two further names: Newborn Nanahuac and Raw
Nanahuac. As Schultze Jena pointed out (Popol Vuh, p. 187), Nanahuac
would appear to be the same as the Aztec deity Nanahuatl (or
Nanahuatzin), who throws a thunderbolt to open the mountain containing
the first corn. Nanahuatl means "warts" in Nahua (D.), which
suggests the appearance of the muscaria when the remnants of its
veil still fleck the cap.
*(73) "How should it be sown, how should it dawn?": "Sowing" (auax-)
and "dawning" (zakir-) are frequently paired throughout the portion of
the P.V. that deals with the predawn world. The meanings of these
two words, which run through them several different threads when
they are paired, have something of the structure of a Mobius strip. If
we start with the literal meaning of sowing in the present context,
the reference is to the beginning of plants; but if we trace that idea
over to the other side of our strip, the sprouting of those same
plants is expressed metaphorically as "dawning." If, on the other
hand, we start from the literal meaning of "dawning," the present
reference is to the first of all dawns; but if we trace that idea back
over to the other side of the strip, the origin of that dawn is
expressed metaphorically as a "sowing," referring to the fact that the
Quiche gods who eventually become Venus and the sun and moon must
first descend into the underworld. The head of one of these gods
becomes the fruit of a calabash tree, while another has his head
replaced by a squash- that is, at least two of them acquire plant
characteristics in the underworld before the coming of the first
literal dawning.
The pairing of sowing and dawning receives a further meaning when it
is taken to refer to human beings, whose perfection is the principal
goal of the world-making gods of the present passage. To trace out
this meaning, we must have recourse to ethnography. In Momostenango
a mother-father or patrilineage head "sows" and "plants" an unborn
child in certain shrines of his lineage by announcing its mother's
pregnancy there (B. Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya, p. 80). On
the "dawning" side of this process, the woman who gives birth to the
child cuya ri zak, "gives it light" (Ibid., p. 211). This particular
tracing remains metaphorical on both sides of the "sowing" and
"dawning," but it retains a twist in that it is specifically built
on the model of the literal sowing and metaphorical "dawning" of

Page 139 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

vegetation. A second human tracing, also metaphorical on both sides
but twisted in that it seems to be built on the model of the
metaphorical "sowing" and literal dawning of heavenly bodies, is
followed out in death and its aftermath. Here the body is put in the
earth, but the deceased "becomes light" or "dawns" (both zakiric) in
two different senses: the body itself is reduced to plain white
(light-colored) bones, but the spirit becomes a spark of light,
something like a star.
*(74) provider, nurturer: This is tzucul cool [tzukul 3ool]; both
words broadly refer to sustenance, but the latter seems to refer
more overtly to actual food than the former (at least in B.), and
the only word that resembles it today is 3obic, "to get fat" (X.). The
providers or nurturers ultimately intended here are human beings,
who will one day sustain the gods through prayer and sacrifice, but
for the time being the gods will succeed only in making animals.
Eventually deer and birds will indeed be among those who nurture the
gods with their blood, but only when there are humans to sacrifice
them; these same sacrificers will also provide their very own blood to
the gods, drawing it from their ears and elbows, and will ultimately
offer the blood and the hearts of human captives.
*(75) But there will be no high days and no bright praise: The
paired words here are uquihilabal [u3ihilabal] and ucalaibal
[u3alaibal]. The first is literally "its-day-ness-instrument,"
referring to the keeping or setting aside of a specific day on the
calendar for ritual purposes; I chose "high days" because the notion
of "holidays" has become so secularized in English (despite the
etymology of that word). The second is "its-brightness (or
manifestness)-instrument"; it could even be translated as "publicity,"
but that term, unlike the Quiche one, is strictly secular, includes
unfavorable attention, and does not involve a visual metaphor.
*(76) just like a cloud, like a mist, now forming, unfolding. Then
the mountains were separated from the water: The "unfolding" here is
upupuheic, which for both B. and Andres Xiloj describes the way in
which clouds form around mountains. "Separated" is my translation of
xtape, tangentially based on tapo, "to pick out" (B.). On reading this
passage don Andres immediately commented: "It's just the way it is
right now, there are clouds, then the clouds part, piece by piece, and
now the sky is clear." It is as if the mountains were there in the
primordial world all along and were revealed, little by little, as the
clouds parted. But don Andres complicated this interpretation by
saying, "Haven't you seen that when the water passes- a rainstorm- and
then it clears, a vapor comes out from among the trees? The clouds
come out from among the mountains, among the trees." This lends a
cyclical movement to the picture: the clouds come from the
mountains, then conceal the mountains, then part to reveal the
mountains, and so on.
*(77) By their genius alone, by their cutting edge alone: The paired
terms here are naual and puz. The former term, although it is a
Nahua borrowing, does not have the narrow meaning in Quiche that it

Page 140 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

has in central Mexico, but rather covers a very broad notion that
may be glossed as "spirit familiar" (see genius in the Glossary for
more detail). The latter term, puz, carries one central literal
meaning from its Mixe-Zoque (and possibly Olmec) origins right down to
its use in modern Quiche: it refers to the cutting of flesh with a
knife (see D. Tedlock, The Spoken Word, p. 265). At the time of the
conquest it was the primary term for sacrifice. In the present
context, it implies that "the mountains were separated from the water"
through an act resembling the extraction of the heart (or other
organs) from a sacrifice. As if to confirm this allusion, the text
goes on to refer to the earth as the "mountain-plain," or huyub
tacah [ta3ah], which is today the principal Quiche metaphor for the
human body.
When don Andres read these lines, he shifted away from the idea that
the preceding lines about cloud formation and dispersal referred to
something happening in the atmosphere around the mountains, moving
toward the idea that this process was a simile for the formation and
differentiation of the mountains themselves. That the mountains
under discussion were made by means of naual rather than physical
labor suggested a certain insubstantiality to him, and he commented:
"Then these mountains are for no other reason than representing that
there are hills or volcanoes." That is to say, he interpreted the
mountains not as hard realities but as mere "signs" (retal), unfolding
themselves "just like a cloud, like a mist."
*(78) it was brought forth by the Heart of Sky, Heart of Earth, as
they are called, since they were the first to think of it: Andres
Xiloj took this to mean that the formation of the earth was an act
of self-revelation on the part of the Heart of Sky and Heart of Earth.
He compared them to the present-day u4ux puuak or "Heart of Metal
(or silver or money)," which reveals itself to the fortunate. As he
explained it, "When one has luck, one picks up some kind of rock,
but in the form of an animal; this is the Heart of Metal. When the
moment comes, suddenly it appears." Such rocks may be volcanic
concretions that happen to resemble animals, or they may be ancient
stone artifacts. They are properly kept in the indoor half of a pair
of patrilineage shrines called the mebil, which consists of a wooden
box placed on a family altar (B. Tedlock, Time and the Highland
Maya, p. 81). Don Andres continued, "This is where one prays, this
is where the fortune, the money, abounds. Here in the Popol Vuh, the
Heart of Sky and the Heart of Earth appeared, and this is where the
earth was propagated." The objects in a mebil should multiply of their
own accord, and that, as don Andres would have it, is what happened to
the object or objects from which the earth began.
The notion of a "Heart of Sky" might seem out of place where
something as substantial as earth or stone is concerned, but don
Andres' interpretation is supported by a much later passage in which
the names Heart of Sky and Heart of Earth are both addressed to gods
whose bodies have been petrified. The connection between these gods
and the sky lies in the fact that they were petrified when the sun

Page 141 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

first rose and burned them. The objects called "Heart of Metal"
today also have their celestial dimensions: volcanic concretions
with animal shapes are said to have been formed at the first
sunrise, just as the stone gods of the P.V. were, while ancient
stone artifacts are said to have been formed where thunderbolts struck
the ground. The P.V. does not mention the latter process, but it
does include thunderbolts among the attributes of the Heart of Sky.
The Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel takes the question of celestial
stoniness home to the sky itself, declaring that the "Heart of Heaven"
is a bead of precious stone (Roys, The Book of Chilam Balam of
Chumayel, p. 91).
*(79) all the guardians of the forests: Andres Xiloj commented: "The
animals are the caretakers of the woods. They [the gods] thought,
'There is a need for animals, so that people won't be able to enter
the woods. The animals will frighten them.'" For the contemporary
Quiche, wild animals are (in effect) the domestic animals of the
Mundo, or earth deity. One cannot take a deer in the hunt without
first asking permission of the Mundo. When a family is in arrears in
its offerings, the Mundo may send a predator from out of the woods
to raid its flocks or herds.
*(80) deer, birds,... yellowbites: On the basis of meaning this list
might be organized into couplets and triplets:
quieh,
deer,
tziquin,
birds,
4oh,
pumas
balam,
jaguars,
cumatz,
serpents,
zochoch,
rattlesnakes,
canti
yellowbites
But whatever the groupings according to meaning, a list of this kind
would be orally delivered today without any more marking of the
transition between jaguars and serpents than that between pumas and
jaguars; each individual word would retain its integrity, as marked by
a stress on its final (or only) syllable, but there would be no
pause until the run of parallel nouns came to a halt, or until the
breath of the speaker ran out. On this basis I have chosen not to
break such lists into lines of verse in the translation, but have
run them on as prose.
*(81) "Why this pointless humming?": The "humming" and "rustling"
referred to in this passage are the lolin- and tzinin- sounds
discussed earlier [see note *(62)]. What the gods are ultimately
looking for here is the sound of articulate human speech, but they
will not succeed in hearing it until Part Four of the present
translation. In the present scene, all they can hear on the earth is
sounds that are indefinitely repetitive or vibratory and therefore
without meaning, just as sounds were without meaning when there was
only the sea.
*(82) "You, precious birds": This is ix ix 4,iquin, in which the
second ix might be treated as a scribal error, but it is essential

Page 142 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

to the full understanding of the phrase. The first ix is plainly
enough "you," in the familiar and in the plural, but the second one
has a double meaning. At one level it is diminutive, making the
whole phrase translatable as "You, precious (or little) birds," but at
another level it is the day name Ix, which immediately precedes
4,iquin or "Bird" in the sequence of twenty day names. These are the
two days devoted to the contemporary rites of the patrilineage
shrine called the mebil, specifically Seven Ix and Eight 4,iquin;
indeed, this shrine is often referred to simply by naming these two
days.
*(83) a place to sleep: This is uarabal, and it alludes to
patrilineage shrines, which are called uarabalha, "foundation of the
house" or, literally, "sleeping (or resting) place of the house."
The animals that are given places to sleep in this passage, queh or
"deer" and 4,iquin or "birds," give their names to two of the days
used for uarabalha rites today. The human mother-father or
patrilineage head uses a low-numbered day bearing the name Queh or
"Deer" to go to the parts of the uarabalha dedicated to people in
order to announce that a woman married into his lineage is pregnant
and to pray for the child she bears. This ritual is called a "sowing,"
just as is the long process in which the divine mother-fathers of
the P.V. speak of making humans and prepare for their coming long
before they actually succeed in making them a reality. Deer result
from one of their four attempts to make humans; these animals are,
in effect, an approximation of real humans, their fault being that
they walk on all fours and lack articulate speech. The implication
here is that in visiting his shrines to announce a child on the day
named after the deer, the human mother-father commemorates the process
whereby properly walking and talking humans were spoken of and
approximated by the divine mother-fathers (the Maker and Modeler)
before they were realized.
The most startling link between shrines and deer- deer as animals
rather than days named Deer- manifests itself in dreams. On this point
I can give firsthand testimony. During the period of my formal
apprenticeship as a daykeeper in Momostenango, I told Andres Xiloj
of dreaming that I was followed along a path by a series of large
deer. After a laugh of immediate recognition he told me that I had
been followed by shrines! He explained that outdoor shrines have
spirit familiars that frequently take the form of deer- and, these
days, of horses and cattle. The path, of course, was that of the
days of the calendar, along which each shrine had its proper place
in a sequence. The deer were following me in anticipation of the
time when I would end my apprenticeship and feed them- that is, make
offerings of my own.
*(84) "Talk, speak out. Don't moan, don't cry out": Here again the
gods express their desire for articulate human speech, this time
contrasted with moans and cries rather than humming and rustling.
Not only that, but they want to hear their own names and praises,
and they ask the animals to "keep our days." This last idea is

Page 143 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

expressed by cohiquihila [cohi3ihilaa], literally, "to-us-you
(plural familiar) day (transitive imperative)," analogous to the
form rendered as "high days." If English permitted "day" to be a verb,
one could translate cohi3ihilaa as "dayify us," with the pun on
"deify" being appropriate enough. A less direct translation would be
"calendrify us."
*(85) they just squawked they just chattered, they just howled:
New sounds have been added to the world here. They are not yet the
sounds of speech, but neither are they like the rippling, murmuring,
and humming of the world that had only a sea. Those sounds tended
toward vowel harmony and repeated consonants- 4,inin- and chamam-, for
example- whereas the verb stems here retain vowel harmony but do not
repeat their consonants: uachela-, carala-, and uoho-.
*(86) It wasn't apparent what language they spoke: The text has maui
xuachinic uuach qui4habal, literally, "not faced-out its face
their-talk-instrument." The active verb uachinic, built on uach,
"face," is used primarily with reference to the bearing of fruit by
plants. The implication is that the sounds made by the animals
contained a potential for articulate speech, but that this potential
was never realized.
*(87) It talked at first, but senselessly: The person of mud is
unique among all the creatures made by the gods in that it not only
lacks sensible speech, but is not even quoted by means of
onomatopoeia. Note also the correlate lack of articulation of its
body. But the subtlest point here is that the only creature made of
mud is also the only one made in the singular, which makes this
episode an allusion to the Adamic myth. What the writers of the P.V.
have to say about Adam, in their indirect way, is that a singular
creature of mud could neither have made sense nor walked nor
multiplied. If there ever was such a creature, there is no way it
could have left a trace of itself; it must have dissolved.
*(88) "a counting of days, a counting of lots": This is uquihixic
[u3ihixic] ubitaxic, "its-being-dayed (or timed) its-being-modeled (or
shaped)." As daykeepers, Xpiyacoc and Xmucane will divine by means
of counting the day numbers and names of the 260-day divinatory cycle,
dividing or "shaping" a fistful of seeds of the coral tree (see the
Glossary) into lots.
*(89) the human mass: "Mass" is anom, which is given this gloss in
B.
*(90) master craftsman: This is ahtoltecat, in which ah- is
occupational; the rest is from Nahua toltecatl, "master of
mechanical arts" (D.).
*(91) "Run your hands over the kernels of corn, over the seeds of
the coral tree": The verb stem here is mala-, "to run the hand over
something" (V.). The contemporary Quiche daykeeper first pours the
seeds out of a small bundle into a pile on a table and mixes them,
moving the right hand over them with palm down flat and fingers
spread, and then grabs a fistful. The remaining seeds are then set
aside; those from the fistful are sorted into lots of four seeds each,

Page 144 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

arranged in parallel rows so that the days can easily be counted on
them, one day for each lot. When seeds are left over from the division
into fours, a remainder of three seeds is made into two additional
lots (with two seeds in one and one seed in the other), while a
remainder of one or two seeds counts as one additional lot. Once the
clusters are complete the diviner begins counting the days of the
260-day cycle, starting in the present (the day of the divination
itself), the past (the day the client's problem began), or the
future (the day of an action contemplated by the client). The augury
is reckoned from the character or portent of the day that is reached
by counting through to the final lot of seeds.
The alphabetic P.V. does not give the numbers and names of the
days counted by Xpiyacoc and Xmucane in this earliest of all
divinations, but the ancient P.V. may have been like the Chilam
Balam book from Chumayel, which treats the first counting of days as
nothing less than the origin of the 260-day calendar itself and
gives not only numbers and names but day-by-day interpretations,
running through twenty consecutive days (Roys, The Book of Chilam
Balam of Chumayel, chap. 13).
*(92) the borrowing: This is ukahic, a term that Andres Xiloj, as
a daykeeper, recognized immediately. When today's daykeeper speaks the
opening prayer for a divination, invoking the sheet-lightning, clouds,
mists, and damp breezes of the world, he or she is said to be
"borrowing" these forces from the days themselves, each of which is
ruled by a lord, and from the mountains of the world, each of which
has a spirit familiar (B. Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya, pp.
155, 157, 162). Xpiyacoc and Xmucane are not as modest as this human
daykeeper in their own borrowing of lightning, moisture, and air
currents: they name the Heart of Sky, whose electrical aspect
ultimately manifests not as far-off and silently flickering
sheet-lightning but as close-up thunderbolts, and who is also known as
Hurricane, the bringer of rains and winds of world-destroying
proportions. Meteorological forces, large or small, serve to connect
the cosmos at large, both temporally and spatially, with the
microcosmic scene of the divination, transmitting information about
distant places or times through the counting of days and through
lightninglike sensations that occur in various parts of the
diviner's own body.
*(93) the lots: This is bit, possibly the same as the stem in the
name bitol, "Modeler" (see Maker, Modeler in the Glossary). My guess
is that it refers to the clusters of seeds that are made up from the
random fistful taken up by the diviner (as described above); in
effect, the diviner is giving shape to a chaotic mass. I translate bit
as "lots" because that word both fits the groups of seeds, which are
arranged in lots of four, and figures in English-language divination
terminology. "Diviner" (in a later passage) is a translation of ahbit,
in which bit has the occupational prefix.
*(94) who stands behind others: This is chiracan, which Andres Xiloj
identified as part of a phrase used today by daykeepers: chirakan

Page 145 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

u3ab, "at-his/her-legs his/her-arms" (in which "legs" and "arms"
include "feet" and "hands"). To be at someone's feet and hands means
to give assistance, as a daykeeper does when praying and giving
offerings on behalf of a client, or a midwife does when assisting a
birth.
*(95) "may you succeed, may you be accurate": Like Xpiyacoc and
Xmucane, the contemporary daykeeper speaks to the seeds while
arranging them, asking for a clear outcome.
*(96) "Have shame, you up there,... attempt no deception": Andres
Xiloj was not surprised to hear the Heart of Sky addressed in this
manner. He pointed out that today's daykeepers (including himself)
also ask that the gods not deceive their divinatory clients. The
praying diviner may say, for example, ma ban la ri mentira, "Do not
make a lie." In the case of the P.V. the client in question is none
other than the god Sovereign Plumed Serpent.
*(97) manikins, woodcarvings: Andres Xiloj remarked, "Then these
will only be representations of humans."
*(98) They just went and walked wherever they wanted: Andres Xiloj
commented: "Then they're like animals." In Quiche thinking one of
the major differences between animals and humans is that humans must
ask permission of the gods to go abroad in the world. To pray that
nothing bad happen to one in the road is to ask permission to pass;
the need for such permission is more acute in the case of visits to
powerful shrines or distant towns. In prayers that prepare the way for
a long trip, one asks not only that there be no robbers in the road,
but that policemen, soldiers, and customs officials look the other
way.
*(99) The man's body was carved from the wood of the coral tree: The
body of the god presently called Maximon in the Tzutuhil Maya town
of Santiago Atitlan is made of this wood (Michael Mendelson, "Maximon:
An Iconographical Introduction," p. 57).
*(100) the pith of reeds: This is zibac; B. gives ziba3 as "the pith
or insides of a small reed."
*(101) a rain of resin: Andres Xiloj commented: "This was turpentine
that fell, and it was burning as it fell."
*(102) the black rainstorm: This is quecal hab [3ekal hab]. As
Andres Xiloj explained, this does not mean that the rain itself was
black, but refers to the darkness created by a very intense rainstorm.
*(103) Into their houses came: This is xoc ula [xoc ulaa],
"entered as visitors." Today any invasion of the house (including
its patio) by a wild animal is viewed as a sign sent by the earth
deity, whether it is a fox or possum that attacks domestic animals or,
say, a bird that happens to fly indoors. Andres Xiloj pointed out that
such animals do not speak (4hauic) but rather give signs (retal) by
their cries or movements. Note that even under the cataclysmic
conditions of the present episode the speaking is done by domestic
animals and by artifacts; it is not attributed to wild animals.
*(104) turkeys: This is ac [a4], which became the term for the Old
World chicken during colonial times. A number of colonial dictionaries

Page 146 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

give the term for turkey as kitzih a4, "true a4" (T. and V.), or
mazeual a4, "Indian a4" (G.), which makes it plain enough that the
pre-Hispanic term for turkey was a4. Today the turkey is called nooz
(X.), a term that had already appeared by the seventeenth century
(listed in B. as noz).
*(105) r-r-rip, r-r-rip, / r-r-rub, r-r-rub: This is holi, holi,
huqui, huqui, onomatopoeic for the sound of a handstone (mano) rubbing
against a grinding stone (metate). If the performance of the present
Quiche story was anything like that of North American Indian tales,
these lines were probably sung. It must be kept in mind that h in
Quiche is rough, like Spanish j or German ch. This roughness would
probably be exaggerated in a dramatic oral rendering, hence my
suggestion in the translation that the r be trilled. When judged by
the fact that the verb for "rub together" is hukunic (X.), huqui,
huqui should probably be huki, huki. Andres Xiloj immediately heard
a sound play in these lines, which he rendered as follows:
hoo ali, hoo ali,
hukuuic, hukuuic
meaning something like this:
Let's go girl, let's go girl,
rubbing together, rubbing together.
*(106) their hearthstones were shooting out: Andres Xiloj
remarked: "It's like a cataract of stones from a volcano!" This
incident may be the origin of the stars Alnitak, Saiph, and Rigel in
Orion; today these three stars are said to be the three hearthstones
of the typical Quiche kitchen fireplace, arranged to form a
triangle, and the cloudy area they enclose (Great Nebula M42) is
said to be the smoke from a fire (B. Tedlock, "Earth Rites and Moon
Cycles").
*(107) wood alone was used for their flesh: Andres Xiloj remarked,
"They lacked blood, or quickening, which is what corn gives." As it
turns out later, real human beings are indeed made of corn.
*(108) "I am their sun ... their months": "Sun" is quih [3ih]
here, which could either be "sun" or "day," but "months" is iquil
[i4il], which is definitely "months," rather than i4, "moon."
*(109) "I am the walkway and I am the foothold of the people":
"Walkway" is binibal and "foothold" is chacabal; -bal is an
instrumental suffix. Andres Xiloj explicated Seven Macaw's statement
as follows: "Binibal is to give light for walking, or to go out on a
somewhat clear road; and chacabal- now we say chacanibal- is the same.
These words are in the prayers we say at the uarabalha [patrilineage
shrines], to ask permission for anyone who goes out of the house to
whatever place. They can walk, they can crawl- chacanibal is to
crawl on all fours. Seven Macaw is saying that he is a person's
feet, since he knows that he has light [to show a person where to
step], but in fact the person sees darkly, it isn't very clear."
*(110) "they stand out": This is cauacoh, translated on the basis of
cauaquic, "to have big teeth (so as to be unable to close the
mouth)" (X.).

Page 147 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(111) the scope of his face lies right around his own perch:
Seven Macaw, as the Big Dipper, is restricted to a path that lies
close to the pole star, unlike the sun and moon (see Glossary and D.
Tedlock, "The Sowing and Dawning of All the Sky-Earth"). The classic
Maya equivalent of Seven Macaw is shown perched atop a northern tree
at Palenque, in the central panel of the Tablet of the Cross and on
the lid of the sarcophagus beneath the Temple of the Inscriptions
(Linda Schele, Notebook, pp. 66-67).
PART TWO
*(112) the mountains ... are softened by him: "Softened" is my
translation of nebonic; X. glosses this as "overcooked," but Andres
Xiloj read it as "soaked." He commented: "When the earth is completely
soaked it can be destroyed by the water. When there are rains of
forty-eight or sixty hours, there may be destruction. Landslides are
the work of such rains."
*(113) Then he went up over the tree and fell flat on the ground:
When birds are shot they fly upward in a spasm before falling from a
tree. But Seven Macaw's movement here also suggests that of the Big
Dipper; assuming that his head and body correspond to the bowl of
the Big Dipper and his tail to its handle, his climbing of the tree to
eat his nances, his going up over the tree when shot, and his fall
to the ground all follow the pattern of the Big Dipper, which rises
with its handle down, goes up over the North Star (counterclockwise)
in a momentarily horizontal position, and then sets with its bowl
end down. The period when all seven stars may be seen in ascendancy,
from mid-October to mid-May, corresponds approximately to the dry
season; the period when the Big Dipper is already in steep descent
by twilight and when all seven stars may become invisible for as
much as half the night, from mid-July to mid-October, corresponds to
the hurricane season.
*(114) "tricksters": This is 4axto4; it is glossed as "the devil" or
"liar" in colonial dictionaries (B. and V.), but that is a
missionary view of the matter. In the P.V., where the word is used ten
different times, it is usually obvious from context that the person or
persons labeled by it have done something tricky or are accused of
trickery. In the present case Hunahpu and Xbalanque have ambushed
Seven Macaw while he was at his meal. In other cases the Four
Hundred Boys suspect Zipacna of being tricky, which he indeed turns
out to be; Xmucane accuses Blood Woman of trickery, but (ironically)
Blood Woman's ability to work magic apparently comes from the fact
that she carries Xmucane's own grandchildren in her womb; Hunahpu
and Xbalanque accuse a toad of trickery, and sure enough it turns
out that the toad never swallowed what he claimed was in his belly;
Xtah and Xpuch are accused of trickery when painted wasps turn into
real ones; and the Quiches are called tricksters by their enemies
for making it look as though the people they've seized for sacrifice
were attacked by wild animals. Except for the cases of Zipacna and the
toad, the trickery works on the side of the protagonists in a given
story. Translating 4axto4 as "trickster" rather than "devil" puts

Page 148 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

the matter in a more general American Indian context, where the
exploits of trickster figures are simultaneously disapproved and
enjoyed.
*(115) "they've dislocated my jaw": This is obviously the origin
of the way a macaw's beak looks, with a huge upper mandible and a much
smaller and retreating lower one.
*(116) "All my teeth are just loose": "Loose" is chu, translated
on the basis of a reduplicated form in B., chuyucha, "to rattle."
*(117) "'Do forgive us'": The addition of "'Do'" to this phrase is
my way of translating qui [ki], which, according to V., carries a
sense of exaggerated politeness.
*(118) with great effort: This is nimac ua chih [nimak uaa 4hih],
"great this effort," in which 4hih is translated on the basis of
4hihinic, "the strength to do something" (X.).
*(119) "What sweets can you make, what poisons can you cure?": The
"sweets" and "poisons" are both qui [quii], a word that carries both
these meanings to this day (for an explanation see sweet drink in
the Glossary).
*(120) "We just pull the worms out of teeth": There is a
contemporary Mopan Maya myth in which Lord Kin ("Sun" or "Day") causes
the chief of the vultures to have a toothache and then is begged to
come and cure it (Thompson, Ethnology of the Mayas, pp. 129-32). But
in this case the motive of the trickery is the protagonist's desire to
get his wife back from the vultures.
*(121) "we just cure eyes": As a medical specialty, the curing of
eyes fits under the same heading as bones and teeth because the Quiche
language classifies the eyes as bones. Eyes are ubac [ubak] uuach,
literally "its-bones (or pits) his/her-eyes," in the P.V.; today
they are uba3uach. Andres Xiloj himself covers a medical territory
similar to that of Hunahpu and Xbalanque: in addition to being a
bonesetter and healer of sprains, he knows how to make eyedrops.
*(122) "It's a worm, gnawing at the bone": The present-day Quiche
retain the notion that a toothache is caused by a worm gnawing at
the bone. According to T. J. Knab (personal communication), there is a
Mesoamerican parasite that takes up residence in the gums.
*(123) a coating: This is cu [3u], "covering" (X.).
*(124) When his eyes were trimmed back: The verb stem here is cholic
[4holic], "to cut or pull out hair or feathers" (X.), or "flay,
skin, take off crust" (V.). This is clearly meant to be the origin
of the large white eye patch and very small eyes of the scarlet
macaw (see Seven Macaw in the Glossary). I take it that Seven Macaw
sported two large metal discs where the patches of the scarlet macaw
are now.
*(125) What they did was simply the word of the Heart of Sky: In a
similar fashion the Zunis sometimes portray the Ahayuuta warrior
heroes- who, like Hunahpu and Xbalanque, are tricksters- as simply
carrying out the word of the Sun Father, though they may appear to
be acting on their own (see D. Tedlock, Finding the Center, pp.
234-48).

Page 149 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(126) a post for their hut.... the lintel of their hut: This
passage is self-contradictory as to what use the Four Hundred Boys
intend for their log. The "post" is acan [akan], literally "leg";
Andres Xiloj explained that this would be a vertical post with a
fork at the top. The "lintel" is uapalil (apalil today), which he
specified as a term for a horizontal beam over a door or window.
*(127) "We'd like some help": This is cacachaquimah [cakacha3imah]
tana, in which caka- is "incomplete-we" and tana indicates
supplication; the verb stem, cha3imah, is given by V. as "ask to
borrow."
*(128) "we'll throw him down": The verb stem here is tzac [tzak],
"fling, cast" (X.). This is mere bravado; it is not what the Four
Hundred Boys actually end up doing.
*(129) "'Why are you spilling dirt in the hole?'": The verb stem
here is written macaha, but with the stem of the h crossed off to make
it into an n. I translate it "spill" on the basis of ma4anic, "to
spill or scatter" (X.). Here the Four Hundred Boys are proposing to
make a sarcastic statement to Zipacna, but once again, as when they
talked about throwing him into the hole, they are indulging in
bravado.
*(130) "wedged": This is pachal, translated on the basis of
pa4hinic, "be between two walls or in a crack" (X.).
*(131) "we'll wham a big log": The verb stem here is tarih, "give
a blow that makes a sound" (X.). In effect the Four Hundred Boys are
planning to put a major vertical post for their hut into place,
resting its butt end on a sacrifice victim.
*(132) he dug a separate hole to one side: Edmonson notes here
that in digging a hole for the present-day Flying Pole Dance,
Quiches place offerings in a hole dug to one side from the post hole
proper (The Book of Counsel, p. 45). Speakers of the Achi dialect of
Quiche tell a story in which a character now known as Zipac carries
a log the narrator compares with the pole used in the Monkey Dance
(Mary Shaw, According to Our Ancestors, p. 48).
*(133) "on another level, or two levels away": "Level" is my
translation of elebal; literally this would be "place of egress,"
but I take my cue from Burgess and Xec, who decided on "elevation"
(Popol Wuj, p. 42), a solution that fits with the general Mesoamerican
notion of a stratified underworld.
*(134) to dedicate: This is lacabebal, with an instrumental suffix
(-bal), translated on the basis of la3abeh, "to inhabit some place,
occupying it" (B.).
*(135) Having taken their pickings: The verb stem here is culun,
translated on the basis Of 3ulunic, "to pluck, devastate, strip" (X.).
*(136) a play on words: This is zacbal tzih, "play-instrument
words"; B. gives zaquibal as "instrument for playing." The authors
of the P.V. seem uncertain as to whether the Four Hundred Boys
actually became the Pleiades (see Hundrath in the Glossary), in
which case motz (the Quiche term for these stars) would mean the
same thing as omu4h, "four hundred," or whether the supposed

Page 150 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

connection between the Four Hundred Boys and the Pleiades is merely
a matter of a pun between omu4h and motz.
*(137) counterfeiting: This is haluachixic, translated on the
basis of haluachir, "change one thing for another" (V.).
*(138) the forearms: This is xul, translated on the basis of an
entry in V. that is missing its heading but falls between xulbak and
xulu; the gloss is "little arms of crabs or shrimps."
*(139) where they opened: This is pa hac, pa is "in" and hac is
translated on the basis of the entry for hak in V., "to open things"
(such as curtains or eyelids).
*(140) the claws: This is ucoc [ucooc] 3ab, "its-carrying-device
arm," in which cooc is translated on the basis of an entry in X.
*(141) They used a flagstone for the back of the crab, which
clattered: Andres Xiloj commented: "A crab is just like a
wristwatch: it has the meat inside and it's pure bone outside."
*(142) they put the shell beneath an overhang: Andres Xiloj pictured
this as a spot beneath a waterfall.
*(143) "By now I can't stand the hunger": "Hunger" is a Quiche
metaphor for sexual appetite; that the metaphorical level is
intended here becomes more obvious as the story unfolds.
*(144) "please come point her out, boys": Andres Xiloj chuckled as
he read this and then said, "This Zipacna is abusing the boys here,
he's saying they shouldn't be afraid. It says here, quibe ta iuaba,
which could be quibe ta iuabaa, 'If only you would come along to
iuabaa- to point it out,' but it could also be, quebe ta iuabah, 'If
only iuabah- your stones, your balls- would come along.' Today, when
someone runs from a fight, the saying is queeme ta iuabah, 'Don't hide
your balls.' So Zipacna is saying, 'Don't you have any balls, boys?'
They're still young." Since the puns in this passage cannot be
preserved in English I have tried to make its sexual dimension more
obvious by using feminine pronouns for the crab (though Quiche
pronouns do not have gender), since the crab is the object of
Zipacna's "hunger."
*(145) "But won't you please": This sentence begins with la qui
[ki]; la makes it a yes/no question and ki (according to V.) indicates
exaggerated politeness.
*(146) "I'll show you a place where there are plenty of birds":
Continuing along the lines of the above comment, Andres Xiloj said,
"There it is again, only now it's nuuaba, 'I show you something,' or
else nuabah, 'my balls'- he's got balls." As for the "birds"
(4,iquin), the primary metaphor for penis is "bird" in Quiche; Q.
dates this metaphor to the late post-Hispanic period, but it is
already present in a colonial dictionary for Pokoman Maya (P.), a
Quichean language.
*(147) "We were entering": The verb stem here is oc-, translated
(literally) as "enter" throughout this passage, a simple solution that
keeps the same double meaning going in English that is present in
the original.
*(148) "facedown ... on our back": These two opposite body positions

Page 151 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

are given throughout the present episode as hupulic and pacalic,
respectively. Although they seem to have caused difficulties for
some translators, they are spelled correctly in the MS., are glossed
in B. in the same way I have translated them, and were perfectly
transparent to Andres Xiloj.
*(149) her shell is gleaming red there: Some translators have
complained about the color of this crab, but there are species of crab
that are red before they are cooked.
*(150) "perhaps I'd better enter on my back": By this time Andres
Xiloj had already begun snickering as he read, but now he burst into
laughter. Explaining himself, he said: "Clearly, the crab is a
woman. As you already know, a woman does it on her back, but here it's
in reverse: the man is on the bottom and the crab will go on top.
These are trial runs. In ancient times, I think, they didn't know what
sin was. They were looking for a way to understand everything."
*(151) only his kneecaps were showing now: At this point don
Andres sat back and said, "My God! All the way to the knees!"
*(152) He gave a last sigh and was calm: The "sigh" here is
biquitahic, translated as suggested by don Andres; X. gives
bi3bitic, "sigh." Don Andres translated xlilob as "was calm"; V. gives
lilot as "tranquil." Of Zipacna's state don Andres commented: "Nothing
will bother him now." The story of Zipacna and the crab prompted him
to tell a story that has been translated elsewhere (see D. Tedlock,
The Spoken Word, pp. 317-20). There is a contemporary Achi story about
a character named Zipac that makes the sexual dimension more overt
than it is in the P.V. (Shaw, According to Our Ancestors, pp. 48-51).
*(153) "Lure this Earthquake into settling down": "Lure" is bochiih,
translated on the basis of bochih, "allure" (B.); "settling down" is
cuubic, "to sit" (X.). I have supplied "this Earthquake" in order to
clarify the sense of the sentence, setting it apart from the plural
reference of the previous sentence.
*(154) "in the course of the days, in the course of the light":
chi be quih [3ih], chi be zac [zak], "in-road day (or sun), in-road
light." According to Andres Xiloj, this means "for all time. Just
the way we in my family are weavers. All the time, and for all time,
we are weavers." For an alternative translation of this line and a
further comment by don Andres, see "as long as there is day" in note
*(358).
*(155) "Lead the way": This is chicama cabe [chi4ama kabe],
literally "imperative-you-take our-road," a common Quiche idiom
which I have translated into the equivalent English idiom.
*(156) they just blow at the birds when they shoot: Andres Xiloj
remarked: "When people go out hunting today with guns, and when they
see that an animal is coming, they do this: [blows a quick puff of
air]. It is like magnetism, they pull it, the animal stops- it
feels, it thinks there is a person hidden. When the animal has stopped
for a moment, the person shoots, and there it is. The animal stopped
to see what this noise was."
*(157) made fire with a drill: This is xquibac cu quicac [xquibak 4u

Page 152 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

qui3a3], "they-drilled then their-fire." And example of the same idiom
is given by B. as canuba3 ca3, "I start a fire"; V. gives bak as "to
drill."
*(158) "the one to be made and modeled": The reference is to
humankind, and the problem is the same one the twins discuss in an
earlier passage. Like so many other American Indian hero twins, they
are monster slayers, making the earth habitable for humans.
*(159) "the human heart": I have supplied "human" here, assuming
that the subject of the discussion has not changed since the
previous sentence.
*(160) "a bite of meat, a meal of flesh": The parallel items here
are tiic and chacuxic, which have been translated in many different
ways; my version is based on tiinic, "to eat meat" (X.), and 4hacuh,
"to eat meat" (V.).
*(161) his ankles were bound his wrists: The "ankles" and "wrists"
are ucul racan ucab [rakan u3ab], literally "its-necks his-legs
his-arms"; Andres Xiloj explained, the "neck" of a leg or arm is its
"ankle" or "wrist" in Quiche.
PART THREE
*(162) let's just drink to the telling: The verb stem for "drink"
here is camuh; I follow Edmonson in reading it as a variant of
kumuh, "to drink" (The Book of Counsel, p. 58). Andres Xiloj liked
this reading and pictured the narrator as seated on the tomb of One
Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, on a day bearing the name Hunahpu. On
many such days contemporary Quiche cemeteries look like crowded picnic
grounds; whole families come to the graves of their ancestors,
sprinkling flower petals, burning offerings, reciting prayers, and
eating and drinking, all this in a respectful but festive mood.
*(163) One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, as they are called: The MS.
leaves out Seven Hunahpu here; I assume that this is an error, given
that everything else in the sentence is in the plural, and given
that One and Seven Hunahpu are named together two sentences later.
*(164) a partner: This is laquel [la3el]. V. gives an example of the
use of this term in which a woman may refer to another woman who
shares the same man with her as nula3el (nu- is "my").
*(165) flautists, singers, and writers; carvers, jewelers,
metalworkers: Note that in these two sets of three skills each,
writing is grouped with the performing arts rather than with
handicrafts. Whatever writing system or systems were employed by the
Quiche, the grouping of writing with flute playing and singing
points to its close association with oral recitation [see also note
*(57)]. "Writers" is my translation of ahtzib [ah4,ib],
"person-who-does-writing," in which 4,ib also covers painting.
*(166) The four ballplayers: These words are supplied; the text only
indicates "they."
*(167) "They're really determined to run right over us!": This is
xax quehiquic uloc [ulok] pacaui [pakaui], literally "certainly
they-cut-straight hither above-us."
*(168) to draw blood from people: Andres Xiloj commented: "When

Page 153 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

there is strife, when people begin to fight, they strike one
another. The blood comes out, and Xibalba receives this blood. We
see that it fell, but it fell into the flasks of the evil ones. It
is like their food."
*(169) to make pus come out of their legs, to make their faces
yellow, to cause jaundice: "Jaundice" is 3anal, "yellowness." This
passage could refer not only to hepatitis but to yellow fever (if
yellow fever was present in pre-Columbian times), whose symptoms
include jaundice. The pus in the legs would be sores spread out
along the lymphatic system.
*(170) to reduce people to bones ... until they die from
emaciation and edema: The first of these ailments is ziiah bac
[bak], in which the first word may be a form of ziy, "extended"
(E.), and the second is "bone"; B. gives ziyah bak as "skeleton" and
ziyah bakil as the name of an unspecified illness; X. gives bakil,
literally "bony," as "thin, weak." The second ailment is xupan,
"dropsy" (V. and G.), better known today as "edema," swelling caused
by excess fluid in the tissues or cavities of the body. According to
Andres Xiloj, the contemporary shamans called ahmesa, "keepers of
the table," sometimes go bad and practice a ritual called chakih mesa,
"dry table," in which they ask Xibalba to cause emaciation: "They
put bones into the body of a person by means of prayers, in order to
dry him up. They put a skull into the body of a person. They dry up
the whole body." He told of a recent case in Momostenango in which a
man was brought to court because "there were skulls, and bones of
the arms and legs, in the place where this man burned his offerings.
It was by means of these things that he screwed people up." Edema is
caused by a separate ritual, called rax mesa, "fresh (or unripe,
sudden, strong) table." Don Andres continued: "This, too, is done with
bones. They put the bone in water, or whatever they put it in, and
this same bone comes to be left in the body of the person, then he
swells up. It's like an injection, but the evil is contained by this
bone. The moment it is put in the body, the evil befalls one."
*(171) to catch up with people: The verb here is culuachih
[4uluachih], "to come about" (B.), "to strike with misfortune" (V.).
*(172) whenever they have filth or grime in the ... house: According
to Andres Xiloj, the best way to keep the agents of Xibalba out of
one's house is to keep the place swept out and not allow trash to
accumulate. See the story in note *(175) for a case in which a house
is cleaned out as a way of ending the deeds of a Xibalban.
*(173) in the doorway of the house, the patio of the house: This
is chirih ha, "at the back of the house," and chuua ha, "at the face
of the house." In Quiche terminology, as Andres Xiloj explained, the
"back" of a house is the side that has a door or entrance way giving
access to a public road or path, while the "face" is the side that
gives onto a patio (whether enclosed on all four sides or not).
*(174) that people should die in the road, just "sudden death": This
affliction is rax camical, "fresh (or unripe, sudden, strong)
death." According to Andres Xiloj, it is like edema [see note

Page 154 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(170)] in that it is caused by practices that come under the
heading of rax mesa: "They come to frighten one in the road, and now
one doesn't arrive home. Suddenly one may fall in the ditch, rax
camical. As it says here in the Popol Vuh, 'Blood comes to the mouth,'
it is as if one had pneumonia, suddenly one begins to vomit blood, and
one dies in a moment. It is a matter of the rax mesa. They put a
bone in the lung, and it is damaged in a moment. One begins to vomit
pure blood. They carry their materials on their shoulders, as it
says here: 'The load on his shoulders.' When they are encountered in
the road, they can kill one. But it isn't the ahmesa directly, but
rather his genius [see the Glossary] or uin [were animal]." See note
*(170) for more about the ahmesa.
*(175) Such are those who shared their thoughts: At this point
Andres Xiloj was reminded of a story, which he told on the spot. It is
about a young man who gets aggravated with his wife almost to the
point of taking a machete to her, all because an emissary of Xibalba
keeps sneaking hairs or bits of rag or even bugs into the food she
prepares. Moving in for the kill, the Xibalban tells the young man
he has just seen his wife serving lunch to another man. Sure enough,
when he gets home for lunch and asks his wife to give him the breast
of the chicken she has prepared, she cannot find it in the pot.
Later the young man is seized with the idea of climbing a tree; the
earth rumbles and he suddenly finds himself looking down on the spot
where the lords of Xibalba regularly assemble to banquet on blood that
has been spilled by violence. He sees Blood Gatherer (the head lord)
come out, and the last one to arrive, named Jodido (a Spanish word
roughly translatable as "screwed-up"), turns out to be the very
Xibalban who has been plotting against him. Jodido brags about how
he sneaked the chicken breast out of the pot and tells the others they
will soon enjoy the blood of the poor woman who was cooking it.
After the Xibalbans leave, the young man returns home and throws
boiling water in each corner of his house. Returning to the banquet
spot in time to see the Xibalbans reassemble, he sees Jodido come in
very late, barely able to move because of the scalding he has
received. After this no more foreign objects appear in the young man's
food.
*(176) they were piqued and driven: This is xetzaixic, "they were
salted (spiced)" (X.), and xecotobax, "they were pursued" (B.).
*(177) And these messengers of theirs are owls: Andres Xiloj
remarked: "At times an owl suddenly arrives near the house and
begins to sing. This is a warning. Yes, it is a warning from Xibalba."
*(178) repeated their words, reciting the exact words: This is ta
xquizac [xquitzak] cut [4ut] quitzih xaui xere ucholic utzih. B. gives
tzaconizah ri tzih as "to fulfill words," and V. gives tzakantic as
"deliver up, render, regurgitate"; xaui xere is "yet the same," and
ucholic is "to say in an ordered way" (V.).
*(179) "Don't the lords ... speak truly?": That this line is part of
the dialogue rather than part of the narrative is made obvious by
the next line, which is clearly a reply.

Page 155 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(180) "We're going,... even though we've just arrived": "Even
though" is my translation of xaet, which B. gives as "in vain,
uselessly." Antitheses are rather frequent in the speech of Hunahpu
and Xbalanque.
*(181) "just play and just sing": The playing here (tzuan-) is
specifically on the flute.
*(182) where the rapids cut through: This is chuchi halha ziuanub,
in which the first word is "at-its-mouth"; the second is "rapid,
violent river" (B.); and the third may be an error for ziuanuh, "to
open a ditch" (V.).
*(183) "Morning": This is calah [3alah], literally "clear, bright,
plainly visible," used as a morning greeting in classical Quiche.
Today the preferred greeting for the morning is zakiric, "it is
getting light (or dawning)."
*(184) they got no relief: This is maui xeyacamaric, in which maui
is negative; B. gives yacamaric as "be relieved, alleviated."
*(185) the laughter rose up like a serpent in their very cores:
Cumatz or "serpent" is a term for various kinds of disabling cramps
(see B. Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya, pp. 54, 56). Concerning
the present case of "serpent," Andres Xiloj said the following: "There
are people who begin to make an uproar when one passes by, they die
laughing. This is because those of Xibalba are among them; it is as if
they had been ordered to do this. This is a work of Xibalba, and
this is what the Popol Vuh is talking about. People get a serpent
(cumatz) here in the breast [indicates a diagonal through his trunk,
from one shoulder to the opposite hip] for having laughed so hard. Now
one can't bear laughing because of the pain of the serpent; now it
doesn't let one breathe. We could go out in the street right now.
There could be a group of people there. They could begin to make an
uproar, killing themselves laughing, and we couldn't hear what they
were laughing about. But Xibalba would know what they were saying."
*(186) down to their blood and bones: This is chi quiqui [quiqui4]
quib, chi quiba [quibak] quib, literally, "that they-blooded
themselves, that they-boned themselves." That is, they became
nothing but blood and bones, having laughed their flesh away; in
idiomatic English, "they laughed themselves sick."
*(187) This ball of theirs is just a spherical knife: This is are cu
[4u] ri quichah [chaah] xa coloquic cha, "this-is then the
their-ball just rounded knife." Chaah often means "ball game" in the
P.V.; wherever it is used for the ball itself, as it is here, it
refers to the ball of Xibalba, whereas the ball used by One and
Seven Hunahpu (and later by Hunahpu and Xbalanque) is always called
quic [qui4], literally "blood (or sap)," but "rubber [ball]" in the
context of the ball game. I suspect that chaah was a generic term
and therefore translate it (wherever it refers to the ball) as just
plain "ball," as contrasted with "rubber ball."
*(188) their torch was brought: The torch is chah, literally "pine";
in the present context it is the Quiche term for what is more widely
known in Mesoamerica as ocote (a Nahua-derived term), a split-off

Page 156 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

stick of extremely resinous pine wood, still widely used for torches
and kindling.
*(189) they were cowering: The verb here is chocochoh, which means
to crouch "in a cowering manner" (B.).
*(190) whistling with drafts, clattering with hail: This is zac
[zak] xuruxuh, zac caracoh [4aracoh], in which zak may be shortened
from zakbach, "hail." The first verb is similar to xururic, "the
penetration of cold" (into a house) or "a sharp whistling" (X.); the
second is similar to 4ararem, "the sound of hail falling" (X.). My
translation retains the drafts and the hail while at the same time
preserving the onomatopoeia.
*(191) The blades are moving back and forth: "Back and forth" is
zacleloh, which B. gives as "in alternation."
*(192) "Put his head in the fork of the tree that stands by the
road": Andres Xiloj read xol che [chee] as "in the fork of a tree," as
did Ximenez long before him. Given that the head of One Hunahpu is
Venus as evening star (see D. Tedlock, "The Sowing and Dawning"),
the form of the tree has two different astronomical interpretations.
On the one hand, it could represent the forked or crossed sticks
that Mesoamerican astronomers used for sighting heavenly bodies; on
the other hand, it could be part of a tree constellation lying
somewhere along the zodiac. Once the calabash tree of the story
bears fruit, the head of One Hunahpu cannot be told apart from the
fruit, which suggests a conjunction between Venus (as evening star)
and a number of closely grouped stars. For example, it could be that
this particular evening star spent part of its period of visibility
between the horns of Taurus, which point upward when Taurus is on
the western horizon.
*(193) "'"Its fruit is truly sweet!" they say,' I hear.": The
words "they say" translate cacha [cachaa], whose use following a
statement in Quiche marks that statement as general hearsay. A more
literal translation would be "it says" or "it is said," but I have
chosen "they say" because that is what a speaker of English would be
likely to use when citing hearsay. Blood Woman is repeating
something that was already marked as hearsay by the time she heard it,
so she adds a further layer of quotation with "I hear." As Andres
Xiloj pointed out, the hearsay in question here is misinformation,
since the fruit referred to is not only not sweet, but is not even
edible (see calabash tree in the Glossary). For a general discussion
of how the writers of the P.V. address the epistemological questions
raised by their text, see D. Tedlock, The Spoken Word, chap. 12.
*(194) "Stretch out your right hand here": Andres Xiloj explained
that the right side of the body (whether that of a male or female)
is symbolically male, while the left is female. Further, the hands
unite the fingers, which symbolize the living members of a family,
graded from babies (the little finger of each hand) on up to the
elderly (thumbs). The fact that Blood Woman receives the sign from the
head of One Hunahpu in her right hand already points toward the
bearing of a male child; in fact she will bear male twins.

Page 157 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(195) "It is just a sign I have given you, my saliva, my
spittle": Because of the mention of "sign" (retal) here, Andres
Xiloj remarked, "Then this is a dream." Asked what would be augured by
being spit on in a dream, he said, "This is two matters. It depends on
whether the saliva is good or bad. When it is good it has a lot of
foam; when it is just clear water it is bad. But here in the Popol
Vuh, one isn't told which kind of saliva it is."
*(196) "Keep the word": The stem of the verb here is oc-, which
can carry the sense of "keeping to something" (V.).
*(197) they were of one mind: This is xaui quinaoh, "same
their-thoughts."
*(198) "It's just a bastard": "Bastard" is hoxbal, literally
"fornication-instrument," glossed as "bastard" by B.
*(199) "Get her to open her mouth": This is chacoto uchi [uchii],
literally "Dig it out of her mouth," an idiom for close questioning.
In terms of the somatic mapping of actual or potential speech, as
conceived by Quiches, this implies that she knows perfectly well
what her father wants her to say; if her word were "in her belly,"
on the other hand, it would mean that she could not readily articulate
a response even if she wanted to. See also notes *(246) and *(259).
*(200) "there is no man whose face I've known": This statement is
not only true in its figurative reference to Blood Woman's sexual
innocence, but in its literal sense: she has never known the (fleshly)
face of the man responsible for her miraculous pregnancy. For the
importance of a man's "face" (and personal identity) in sexual
encounters, see Part Four of the present translation, "And they sent
the two of them,..."
*(201) "take it in their hands": This is quicololeh [qui4ololeh],
a reduplicative form of 4oleh, "have something round in the hand"
(V.); B. gives colola as "revolve, turn around."
*(202) "So please stop": The verb here is queque; B. gives
quequeba as "stop, detain."
*(203) "they will make themselves familiar with its composition":
This is xchiquihunam uachih utzaquic [u4,akic], "will-they-compare
appearance its-being-made (or constructed)"; X. gives hunamanic as
"compare" and B. gives hunamah uach as "to make friends."
*(204) "nor will your homes be here": In the biological sense,
this means that future owls will be free to move around the surface of
the earth. If I am right in suspecting that the messenger owls of
Xibalba correspond to the planet Mercury, the astronomical sense of
this same statement would be that Mercury appears above the horizon on
more days than it remains below (the average ratio for a given Mercury
cycle is 76:40)
*(205) "only blood": "Blood" is a literal translation of quic
[qui4], which also refers to gums and resins from trees (including
latex), in this case the blood-red resin of the cochineal croton
(see croton in the Glossary).
*(206) "use the fruit of a tree": This is a figurative reference
to nodules of sap from the cochineal croton.

Page 158 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(207) it formed a surface like blood: This is quehe cu [4u] ri quic
[qui4] rih xuxic, "like then the blood its back (or upper or outer
surface) became."
*(208) "nodules of blood": This is quic [qui4] holomax. For a
discussion of "blood" in this context, see notes *(205)-*(207).
Holomax would seem to be composed of a verbal form of holom, "head,"
with a passive suffix (-x); in the present context it would mean
something like "headed-up," hence "nodules."
*(209) and when he lifted it up with his fingers: This is ta
xuchuieh cu [4u] acanoc [a3anok], "when he-lifted-with-fingers and
upward"; B. gives chuieh as "to lift with the fingers."
*(210) they leaned over it intently: This is xechique [xechike]
chuui, in which xe- is "complete-they" and chuui is "over (or on top
of)"; V. gives chiker as "to be inclined pensively."
*(211) the mother of One Monkey and One Artisan: In fact the
mother (in the literal sense) of One Monkey and One Artisan has
already died by this time; in the present passage the term "mother" is
being used in its role-designating sense rather than in its
genealogical sense. One Monkey and One Artisan are living alone with
Xmucane, their father's mother, at this point; she is the only
person they have who could fill the role of "mother."
*(212) "mother, madam": This is lal chichu, in which lal is "you
(singular polite)," here translated as "madam." I cannot locate chichu
in any dictionary, colonial or modern, nor did Andres Xiloj know it,
but it resembles chuch, "mother." It is not the ordinary term for
mother-in-law; that is alib, which is used by Blood Woman later on
in this same dialogue.
*(213) I'm your daughter-in-law and I'm your child": The use of
"child" here is metaphorical. A Quiche daughter-in-law takes up
residence with her husband's family; in offering herself not only as a
daughter-in-law but as a "child," Blood Woman both seeks the kind of
acceptance a daughter would have and makes an offer of loyalty.
*(214) "my lastborn children": Given that Xmucane is never mentioned
as having had any children other than One and Seven Hunahpu, she may
be using chipa [4hipa] or "lastborn (youngest)" endearingly, in effect
calling her sons, who were adults when they left home, "my little
babies."
*(215) "They have merely made a way for the light to show itself":
"A way ... to show itself" is ucutbal [u4utbal] rib, literally
"its-showing-instrument." The immediate reference, as the rest of
the sentence makes clear, is to the symbolic survival of the dead
through their offspring, "light" being a metaphor for birth. But
"light" may also be taken literally here: Blood Woman's twin sons will
account for Venus (in some of its cycles) and, in time, the sun and
moon (or at least the full moon) (see D. Tedlock, "The Sowing and
Dawning").
*(216) "Truly, what I say to you is so!": I take it that this
sentence belongs to Blood Woman rather than Xmucane, given that it
is followed with utz bala, "Very well," which signals the beginning of

Page 159 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

a reply and definitely belongs to Xmucane.
*(217) "since you are already my daughter-in-law": The grandmother
isn't so much accepting Blood Woman's claim to kinship here as she
is saying (with sarcasm) something like, "If you say you're my
daughter-in-law, then act like one." Quiche daughters-in-law, who live
with the families of their husbands, are subject to the commands of
their mothers-in-law, who give them heavy household tasks to do.
*(218) she went to the garden: "Garden" is abix, often translated
"milpa." Maize is the principal plant in the highland Mayan milpa, but
it is interplanted with beans and squash. Each of these crops has
different characteristics in its response to wet or dry conditions
at various points in its growth cycle; interplanting assures that when
one crop suffers during a given season, another part will prosper.
*(219) but there was only one clump: In Mesoamerica corn is properly
grown in thick clumps, not stalk by stalk in single file; clumps
survive high winds better.
*(220) "Come thou, rise up, come thou, stand up": This is tatul
ualoc tatul tacaloc. In tatul, ta- suggests Cakchiquel "you" (singular
familiar in V.) and -at- suggests Quiche "you" (singular familiar),
while -ul would be "come" in either language. For the rest, ual- is
"get up" (B.) and tacal- is "stand up, present oneself" (B.), while
-oc [-ok] carries an urgent or imperative force. Throughout the
P.V., I translate the first person singular familiar pronoun as "thou"
in prayers but as "you" in conversation.
*(221) they were rowdyish and flushed with jealousy: For these two
qualities the MS. has quichaquimal and qui3a3 [quicak] uachibal, in
which qui- is "their." B. gives chaquimal as "tumult, clatter, fuss,
disturbance; clamor of boys." X. gives quiak [cak] uachinic, which
would literally be "red in appearance," as "zeal, jealousy."
*(222) the successors: This is quexel [4exel], "substitute." This
may be a reference to the fact that Mars, the planet of One Monkey and
One Artisan, sometimes serves as morning star in the absence of Venus,
which in one of its five cycles is the planet of One and Seven Hunahpu
(see D. Tedlock, "The Sowing and Dawning"). When Venus and Mars appear
in the east together Mars remains long after Venus has descended
into the underworld, just as One Monkey and One Artisan remained on
the face of the earth when One and Seven Hunahpu went to Xibalba.
*(223) The anger in their hearts came down on their own heads:
Andres Xiloj remarked, "We see a person; we speak behind his back
and he doesn't hear what we are murmuring. Then this murmur doesn't
fall upon that person, but we are the ones who pay for it." A
daykeeper, taking on the task of defending a person who has been the
victim of witchcraft, asks in prayer that "the one who did this work
should be the one to receive it."
*(224) They were decoyed: The verb here is poizaxic [poyizaxic];
if English "doll" were a verb, this could be translated literally as
"to be dolled"- that is, to be misled by a doll. Today poyizaxic is
most commonly employed with reference to the use of scarecrows in
fields.

Page 160 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(225) "but our birds just got hung up in a tree": When birds are
shot they sometimes close their feet around the branch where they were
sitting and then hang there, dead.
*(226) "We'll just turn their very being around": The verb here is
catzolcomih, which Andres Xiloj read as catzol3omih, "to turn around."
*(227) "Just as they wished us to be slaves here": This is quehe
ri ala xohpe ui uloc [ulok] chiqui4ux, "like the slaves we-came
location here in-their-hearts," in which I take xohpe chiqui4ux to
be an idiom analogous to the one given in B. as chi nucux [4ux]
petinac [petinak], literally "in-my-heart come-from-perfect" but
glossed as "of my own will." Ala ("slaves") is shortened here from
alabil, which is the form given in a later and similar passage
(translated "slaves").
*(228) "How can we grab hold?": The verb stem here is chanic,
translated on the basis of chanih, "keep in the fist" (B.). The tree
is too thick for One Monkey and One Artisan to use their hands in
coming down.
*(229) "simply shameless": This is rax quiuach, "fresh (or raw or
green) their-faces"; B. gives rax uach as "shameless."
*(230) "Will you please not laugh": Among the contemporary
Jacaltec Maya there are myths in which the hero tricks his elder
brother or his mother's brothers into going up a tree that grows
taller and maroons them, after which they turn into monkeys. The
hero's mother then tries to reverse this transformation but fails
(Morris Siegel, "The Creation Myth and Acculturation in Acatan,
Guatemala," pp. 122-24; Oliver La Farge, Santa Eulalia, pp. 53-56), in
one case because she disobeys an admonition not to laugh (La Farge,
pp. 51-53).
*(231) the patio of the house: See note *(173) for a discussion of
the parts of a house.
*(232) the skinny little things below their bellies: This is chi
xiriric xe quipam; Ximenez translated xiriric as "that which is thin,"
and Andres Xiloj read it as "round little thing," chuckling as he
did so. This refers not to the "bellies" of the monkeys (quipam) but
to what is "below" or "at the bottom of" (xe) their bellies.
*(233) and their tails wiggling in front of their breasts: This is
chi chilita he pu chuchi qui4ux, "that wag tails and at-edge-of
their-breasts." Andres Xiloj read chuchi as "up against" in this
context. Spider monkeys and howler monkeys both have very long
prehensile tails; howlers are seldom observed, but spider monkeys
are given to winding their tails around to the front of their bodies
and all the way up to their chins.
*(234) thin red lips: This is ca3 [cak] ruxruh uchi [chii], "red
thin his-mouth (or lips)"; ruxruh may be a reduplicative form of
ruxaa, "thin" (X.).
*(235) with faces blank: "Blank" is my translation of tac [ta3],
"deafened" (B.) or "fool" (X.) or "flat" (various sources).
*(236) puckering their lips: "Puckering" is my translation of
mutzumac [mutzumak], based on the gloss offered by Andres Xiloj: "to

Page 161 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

make small, like a trumpet." This passage reminded don Andres of the
contemporary Monkey Dance in Momostenango: "These monkeys, when they
come out here in the fiesta, they scratch themselves, and do their
mouths this way [touches himself all around the mouth], as if they had
fleas and lice." They also climb a high pole and do acrobatics on a
tightrope above the plaza.
*(237) wiping their mouths and faces: The verb stem here is mal;
B. gives mala- as "to touch lightly" and Andres Xiloj read it as "to
clean."
*(238) suddenly scratching themselves: This is macama [makama]
chiquihoquih chique; Andres Xiloj read hoquih as ho3oh, "to
scratch"; chique is "to them," possibly referring to the mouths and
faces of the monkeys.
*(239) their mattock, their hoe: These tools are mixquina and
xoquem, respectively; I have rendered the former word as "mattock"
because B. glosses it as a "large" hoe.
*(240) leveling ... the trees: "Leveling" is my translation of
3a3chacachoh, based on cakchachoh, "thrown down by the wind" (V.).
*(241) stalks and brambles: "Stalks" is my translation of tum, based
on tun, "shoot (of a plant)" (V.); "brambles" translates quixic, based
on 4ix, "spine (or thorn)" (X.).
*(242) dumps wood chips on his head: The verb here is puquih,
translated on the basis of pu4unic, "dunk" or "throw" (X.); the
"wood chips" are uuebalche [uuebalchee], glossed as such by B.
*(243) they massage, they stretch their legs, their arms: Andres
Xiloj, who is a uikol bak or "bonesetter" in addition to being a
daykeeper, remarked here that he uses a combination of massage and
stretching to treat sprains.
*(244) fox, coyote: The fox is yac in Quiche; it is sometimes called
gato del monte or "mountain cat" in rural Guatemalan Spanish, which
has caused much confusion among speakers of English. Foxes are more
like cats than like dogs in their fur and in their graceful leaps. But
in Quiche, as in English, the fox is nevertheless thought of
together with the coyote (utiu), as in the case of the present list,
whereas cats are covered by the "puma, jaguar" pair of terms occurring
earlier in the list.
*(245) "Arise, conjoin, you trees! / Arise, conjoin, you bushes!":
This is iac lin che [chee] iac lin caam [4aam], in which iac is "for
inciting someone" (V.) and is probably related to yacalic, "be up
high" (X.); lin is "to squeeze, press together" and is used for
tamping the weft in weaving (B.).
*(246) "My word is in my belly": Here and in a later passage the
animal who makes this statement is assigned its characteristic food in
exchange for a message. For the contemporary Quiche diviner, words
that are "in the belly" of a person are words that person is unable to
bring to consciousness and articulate; words that are higher up, in
the chest or the head, are more likely to be spoken, and those that
are in the throat or mouth or on the tongue are at the very point of
actually being said. As for animals, their utterances are regarded

Page 162 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

as clear to other members of the same species but very difficult for a
human to understand. The fact that the animals in the P.V. have
their word in their bellies is not only an indication of their
interest in being given food but an indication of the difficulties
of understanding what animals have to say. They may be able to make
sounds, but the meaning of these sounds is as hidden as are the
crucial facts a human client may find difficult to articulate when a
diviner asks probing questions. See also notes *(199) and *(259).
*(247) "up under the roof of the house": This is chuui ha,
"at-its-top house," which, as Andres Xiloj explained, means the attic.
He pointed out that this is the part of the house where tools are kept
today, along with the stored harvest.
*(248) "But what will your grandmother say if she sees me?":
Andres Xiloj commented: "When the rat speaks it isn't understood
what he says, 'Ui4,, ui4,, uit4,.' When a boy is born, then the rat
doesn't cry, 'tis said. He is content, because the boy is the one
who sows the garden. Now, if a woman is born, then the rat cries, 'tis
said, because when the rat is near a woman in the kitchen she grabs
a stick to kill him."
*(249) they were just fooling: "Fooling" is michbal [mi4hbal],
literally "means of plucking," an idiom for deception. Note that in
a later story the victims of deception are literally plucked.
*(250) loosening the ball: The verb here is colon, translated on the
basis of colo, "to free" (B.).
*(251) These were taken away: The verb stem here is mahix,
"be-taken," translated on the basis of mahinic, "to take" (X.).
*(252) a louse fell on her elbow: I read chucayac as "elbow" on
the basis of 4hucah, the entry for "elbow" in X., and picture
Xmucane with her head buried in her arms. The louse, of course,
falls from her head.
*(253) "My word is contained": "Contained" is 4oba, translated on
the basis of coba, "to contain" or "keep to oneself" (B.).
*(254) "bent over": This is pe, translated on the basis of
pe4elic, "to sag" (X.).
*(255) when he had been united with the toad: The verb here is
xrictaxic, a complete and passive form of the verb given by B. as
riquitahic, "to join."
*(256) on the rim of the ball court: "Rim" is zutzil (in which -il
is adjectival), translated on the basis of tzutz, "to finish
weaving" (E.) or "to finish weaving by filling out the space at the
edge" (V.). I take it that the falcon alighted at the top of the
wall enclosing the ball court.
*(257) "Wak-ko! Wak-ko!": This is uac co, uac co in the MS. The bird
in question, the uac or laughing falcon (see Glossary), makes two
different sounds: a long call consisting of a single, rapidly repeated
syllable, resembling laughter, and a short song that makes use of
two different syllables. L. Irby Davis transcribes a typical phrase of
the song as woo-o ka-woo (A Field Guide to the Birds of Mexico and
Central America, p. 25), which is close to the way the P.V. has it.

Page 163 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Michael Coe has called my attention to the fact that the Aztecs,
like Hunahpu and Xbalanque in the present passage, took the sounds
of this falcon (called oactli in Nahuatl) to be portentous. The
call, which they heard as uncontrolled laughter, was a bad omen, but
the song was good (Sahagun, Florentine Codex, book 5, pp. 153-55).
Hunahpu and Xbalanque, in a move the original hearers of their story
may have found humorous, take the matter of the omen into their own
hands, bringing the bird down and demanding to know exactly what
message it carries. The song would seem to be a good omen for them,
despite the dangers implied by the message that lies behind (or
inside) it; they are like the twin heroes of North American Indian
myths in fearlessly taking immediate action whenever a new adventure
presents itself. But their grandmother, like her own North American
counterpart, is filled with apprehension.
*(258) their blowgun shot: The "shot" of the blowgun is ubac [ubak],
literally "its bone" or "its pit" (in the sense of the pit of a
fruit).
*(259) "My word is contained in my belly": See note *(246) for a
discussion of the meaning of words in bellies. What is notable in
the present context, where the hawk contains the snake that contains
the toad that contains the louse who has the message, is a symbolic
acting out of the structure of the speech of messengers. Again and
again the messengers of the P.V. deliver their news in the form of
multiply embedded quotes; in the present episode each animal
corresponds, as it were, to a pair of quote marks, one pair inside the
next.
*(260) he just sort of drooled: This is xa quehe chucaxh, "just like
that-he-drooled"; I translate the verb stem, caxh, on the basis of
caxahinic, "to drool" (B.).
*(261) they kicked him: The verb stem here is iic, translated on the
basis of yicbal, "kick with the foot" (B.). I have spared the reader
the redundancy of the original phrasing, which goes on to specify that
the kicking was indeed done with the foot.
*(262) they crushed the bones: The verb stem here is cah [4ah],
translated on the basis of 4ahinic, "to crumble" (X.).
*(263) it was right there in his mouth: In terms of the somatic
mapping of speech, as conceived by Quiches, this implies that the toad
knew perfectly well what the message was; it was not buried in his
belly, a realm of the unconscious or the dimly perceived, but right up
front in his mouth [see notes *(246) and *(259)].
*(264) Each of us will plant an ear of corn: These are not kernels
(ixim) but ears (ah) that are planted (tic), and as will be made
clear, they are "planted" not in the earth but above it, in the
attic of the house, where harvested corn is stored. Andres Xiloj
recognized this as one of the rituals he carries out in his capacity
as a mother-father [see also the notes immediately below and
*(331)-*(334), as well as the Introduction].
*(265) When the corn dries up: "Corn" has been supplied here; the
original sentence does not specify what is drying (chakihic). It might

Page 164 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

be the ears of corn Hunahpu and Xbalanque left in the center of
their house, but Andres Xiloj took it to be the ripening of a corn
crop in their field, which would coincide with the arrival of the
dry season.
*(266) when the sprouting comes: This is ta chipe utux, "when
there-comes its-shoot." It would not be the sprouting of the ears of
corn left in the center of the house by Hunahpu and Xbalanque, but
of a new crop in the field [see notes *(331)-*(334)].
*(267) Hunahpu planted one and Xbalanque planted another: This makes
it sound as though there were two ears of corn, but today it would
be four: one yellow, one white, one spotted, and one blue. Note that
the ears planted by Hunahpu and Xbalanque, however many of them
there may have been, are later given four different names.
*(268) where the earth is damp: This is rax uleu, literally "green
(or raw) earth," in contrast with the chaquih [chakih] uleu or "dry
earth" mentioned in this same sentence; my translation follows the
reading offered by Andres Xiloj.
*(269) in the middle of the inside of their house: This is
chunicahal [chuni4ahal] upa cochoch, "at-its-middle its-inside
their-house." Andres Xiloj was quite definite that this could only
mean indoors, not in the patio. See note *(173) for further
information on the parts of a house.
*(270) the roads of Xibalba: Apparently all four roads eventually
lead to or through Xibalba, but in an earlier passage "the" Road of
Xibalba, and specifically of its lords, is the Black Road (see
Glossary).
*(271) "What is it, Wing?": "Wing" has been provided.
*(272) each one named by the one ranking above him, and naming in
turn the name of the one seated next to him: This is huhun
chiholoman ubixic cumal are chibiin ubi hun ri cubul chuxucut,
"each-one from-ahead being-named by-them this-one naming his-name
one that seated at-his-side." I interpret chiholoman as referring to
differences in rank, with chi- as prepositional and holom as "head" in
the sense of leadership (a sense given by V. under the entry for
ui). In the dialogue that follows each lord is indeed named by the one
ranking immediately above him and in turn names the next one down
the line; the only exception is One Death, who has no one above him
and must therefore be named by Seven Death.
*(273) "These aren't lords! These are manikins, woodcarvings!":
Strictly speaking this remark refers to the two manikins, or
woodcarvings, who are seated first in the sequence, but may also be
taken as slyly referring to the entire group of lords. They are
waiting for a good laugh, like the one they had earlier at the expense
of One Hunahpu and Seven Hunahpu, but instead the joke is on them.
*(274) "here's our rubber ball," said the Xibalbans: This is one
of the few points at which qui4, "rubber ball," is used with reference
to the ball belonging to Xibalba, which is otherwise called chaah, a
generic term for "ball" [see note *(187)], or else by its proper name,
White Dagger (see Glossary). Given the general air of duplicity in the

Page 165 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

present passage, we may assume that the Xibalbans are falsely using
the term qui4.
*(275) "just a decorated one": This is xa huchil [hu4hil], in
which I take hu4hil to be an adjectival form of hu4hunic, "to
stripe, put on a design" (X.). The ball of Xibalba (see White Dagger
in the Glossary) is fundamentally different from the rubber ball
used by Hunahpu and Xbalanque, but the Xibalbans are claiming that
it is merely decorated.
*(276) "just a skull": The ball of Xibalba is surfaced with
crushed bone (see White Dagger in the Glossary).
*(277) "We've said enough,": This is coh4hachic,
"we-stop-talking," translated on the basis of forms like chach and
chachachi in B., which have to do with the cessation or hushing of
talk. Others have treated coh as a separate word here, in which case
it would mean "puma," but that leaves 4hachic hanging.
*(278) "Death is the only thing you want for us! Wasn't it you who
sent a summons to us?": This is an ironic reference to the names of
One and Seven Death. To put it in other words, "Given that you are
named came (Death), no wonder you want our camic (death)!" Hunahpu and
Xbalanque play on the name came again in a later episode. See One
Death, Seven Death in the Glossary for a discussion of their name.
*(279) "One bowl of red petals": "One bowl" is my translation of
huticab, in which I take -ticab to be a numeral classifier for
counting by the bowlful, similar to -tuc in hutuc, "one jarful"
(T.); the bowls in question here (zel) are mentioned just before this.
"Petals" translates a word given as muchih the first time and muchit
thereafter, which Andres Xiloj read as muchic, referring to the
"undoing" of flowers to get their petals off, rather than as mu4h,
which is an herb (known as chipilin in Spanish) whose leaves are
used as a seasoning in beans. Today flower petals are sprinkled on
tombs and may be used to adorn shrines before offerings are burned.
*(280) "Whip-poor-will!" and "Poor-willow!": The bird calls here are
xpurpuuec and puhuyu, respectively. Andres Xiloj recognized
xpurpuuec as the call of the bird named perpuuak, which he described
as a ground-dwelling bird that calls out at night. This is obviously a
whippoorwill; phonetically the Quiche rendition of its call is not
that different from the English version, except for the final
consonant (for an ornithologist's technical description of the call
see Davis, A Field Guide to the Birds of Mexico and Central America,
pp. xiii-xv). I interpret puhuyu as a similar but somewhat simpler
call, belonging to a related species, and translate it as "poorwill"
when it is used as a species name rather than as a call.
*(281) the nibbling at their own tails,... wings: This may be a
reference to the fact that the tails and wings of whippoorwills and
poorwills are marked with bands, bars, and spots that give them a
mottled appearance.
*(282) an acrobatic performance: This is tiquitoh, translated on the
basis of tiquita, "to dance audaciously in front of others" (B.).
*(283) all the Xibalbans looked sick, they paled: The key forms here

Page 166 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

are zaccahe [zakcahe], "be discolored in sickness" (V.), and zacbu
[zakbu], "pallid" (B.).
*(284) their mouths were split wide: Whippoorwills and poorwills are
night-jars (Caprimulgidae), all of which have small bills but mouths
that gape very wide.
*(285) countless drafts, thick-failing hail: For more about the
drafts (teu), see note *(190). The hail is zacbocom [zakbokom],
based on glosses offered by B. and by Andres Xiloj.
*(286) a house of fire: This is hun ha chi 3a3, a descriptive phrase
not constructed in the same way as the proper names given the other
houses- balami ha, "Jaguar House," for example. It is omitted from the
earlier list of five test houses and is the most briefly described
of the houses in the present sequence; it may be a secondary
elaboration, based on the immolation undergone by Hunahpu and
Xbalanque in a later episode. That would leave five proper test houses
in both passages, probably corresponding to segments of five different
kinds of Venus cycles (see Bat House in the Glossary and D. Tedlock,
"The Sowing and Dawning").
*(287) "Can you see how long it is till dawn?": "How long" is my
translation of hanic, "How much?" (B.).
*(288) "What's going on?": This is my reading of huchalic, based
on hucha, "How?" or "What's this?" (B.).
*(289) Xbalanque despaired: The verb stem here is quixbih,
translated on the basis of 4ixbeh, "to have shame" (V.) and
considerations of context.
*(290) "Alas!": This is acaroc [probably akarok], which Ximenez
translates as "Ay! Ay!" Elsewhere akarok begins a song of lament,
where I again translate it as "Alas!" But when it begins prayers I
render it as "Wait!" on the basis of akar, "wait" (V.) and the
apparent imperative suffix (-ok). A person at prayer is said to
"cry" (o3ic) and "call out" (zi4ih); to translate akarok as "Alas!"
emphasizes the emotional tone, while "Wait!" emphasizes the attempt to
get attention.
*(291) He brought a squash: What the coati brings is written as coc,
which must be 3o3, "squash," rather than cooc, "turtle." As Edmonson
has pointed out (The Book of Counsel, p. 124), turtles do not have
seeds, and I would add that a turtle would not burst open when hitting
the floor of a ball court.
*(292) then brains came from the thinker, from the sky: I follow
Edmonson (The Book of Counsel, p. 124) in reading tzatz as tzatz
3or, "brains" (literally "thick dough"). According to the riddling
"language of Zuyua" in the Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel, the
"brains" of the sky consist of copal (Roys, The Book of Chilam Balam
of Chumayel, pp. 90, 96). That raises the possibility that
"thinker," which is ahnaoh (ah- is occupational) in the present
passage, could be a pun on naoh [nooh], which is a variety of copal
(X.). For a discussion of punning in the language of Zuyua, see
Brian Stross, "The Language of Zuyua."
*(293) His strength was just the same: "Strength" is chuuc here,

Page 167 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

translated on the basis of chu3a, "strength" or "force" (V.).
*(294) "Possum is making streaks": This is caxaquin uuch [caxakin
uu4h], "he-is-making-black-streaks possum." V. has an entry for
xakin uu4h, "a darkness before dawn," which confirms that uuch
should be uu4h, "possum"; Ximenez translated "vulture," as if the text
had read 4uch. Andres Xiloj read the verb stem as xakin, "make black
stripes"; V. has "stripe with carbon" as a gloss for xakih. Don Andres
commented: "At four-thirty in the morning it is as if black clouds
were placed there at the end of the sky [the horizon], they are like a
sea, they are in grades or levels, alternating yellow and black. Then,
according to the hour, as it clears up, the black becomes blacker,
blacker, blacker, and what was yellow becomes redder, as the sun comes
nearer. Then it changes, these black clouds are no longer there, now
there is only the light of the sun. These black clouds appear to be
over the earth, they go far [to the left and right], all the way to
wherever. The stripes signal that the sun is already shining; they are
a reflection. When one gets up at four or four-thirty in the
morning, cak chuui xecah, 'it is red over the end of the sky.' At
first only one black band is there, then it divides up. One can see
all this in the dry season, but not at this time of year" (as he
said this his voice was almost drowned out by the sound of rain).
The possum who made the black streaks or bands in the P.V. is called
mama, "old man (or grandfather)," which identifies him as one of the
so-called "year-bearers" (see the Introduction). The year-bearers
announce the coming of a new solar year, just as the black streaks
announce the coming of a new day.
*(295) "You should just make lots of threats": The verb stem here is
yecuh, "be in a threatening attitude" (under the entry for yecoh in
B.).
*(296) "Stay there in the oaks": These are pixc, "oaks" or
"acorns" (V., G.), not pix, "tomatoes."
*(297) having recovered the ball from among the oaks: "Oaks" has
been supplied here. I picture Hunahpu and Xbalanque standing among the
oaks, pretending they have found the ball when in fact they have
traded it for a squash.
*(298) The squash was wearing out: The verb stem here is pucabin
[pu3abin], translated on the basis of pu3, "wear down" (V.).
*(299) bringing to light its light-colored seeds, as plain as day:
This is zaquiram cu ri uzaquilal [zakiram 4u ri uzakilal], literally
"becoming-light (or white) then the its-lightness-own." Zakir- is also
"to dawn," and zakil is the term for squash seeds; in the
translation I have added the word "seeds" and the phrase "as plain
as day" in order to make these dimensions more obvious to the
reader. Further, zakir- is a metaphor for the sprouting of plants, but
the phrase "bringing to light its light-colored seeds" turns that
metaphor inside out. When the squash bursts and causes a "dawning"
of seeds, it is a "dawning" that comes from the harvested fruit of a
plant rather than from the planted seeds. To put it another way, the
seeds burst forth rather than being sown.

Page 168 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

This passage probably has an astronomical dimension as well. Keeping
in mind that Hunahpu and Xbalanque, in their Venus or ballplayer
aspect, cannot stray from the zodiac, we may speculate that the
splattered squash seeds correspond to a constellation, and that this
constellation is closer to being "in bounds" with respect to the
zodiac than the oaks (or acorns) discussed in note *(296). The
Pleiades are within the zodiac, but they would seem to be accounted
for by the Four Hundred Boys. But the seeds of the burst squash
could at least be somewhere near the Pleiades, since the Four
Hundred Boys may be rabbits (see under their name in the Glossary) and
since it is a rabbit who leads the Xibalbans away from the ball court.
*(300) if we dumped their bones in the canyon: T. J. Knab informs me
that in the lore of contemporary Nahuatl speakers in the Sierra de
Puebla, this is precisely the procedure that would be used to put a
permanent and complete end to a person. On the other hand, grinding
the bones and putting them directly into water (which is what is
finally done with Hunahpu and Xbalanque) would ensure continued life
in some form.
*(301) since you would see their faces: This is an allusion to
what happened when the head of One Hunahpu was put in a tree.
*(302) sprinkle them: The verb stem here is icah, "sprinkle" (B.).
*(303) "You'll never put that one over on us": The verb stem here is
mich [mi4h], "pluck," but in the present context a literal translation
would not make sense in English [see note *(427) for a case in which
deception involves literal plucking of the victim].
*(304) They grabbed each other by the arms and went head first
into the oven: Hunahpu and Xbalanque do not ascend as the sun and moon
until later in Part Three of the translation, but their
self-immolation here is obviously the act that opens the way to that
event. In Aztec mythology the sun and moon are again a pair of
males, Nanahuatzin and Tecuciztecatl, though apparently not
brothers. They do not jump into the flames arm in arm; instead, the
former jumps in because the latter is afraid to, and then the latter
follows out of shame. At first they rise as two identical suns, but
then Tecuciztecatl is dimmed and becomes the moon (Sahagun, Florentine
Codex, Book 7, pp. 2-7).
*(305) raising their shouts, raising their cheers: Andres Xiloj
remarked, "It's like they held a fiesta, complete with a marimba."
*(306) The two of them looked like channel catfish: For the
identification of the fish, see the Glossary. There is a classic
Maya vase on which a figure that has been positively identified as
Hunahpu by Floyd Lounsbury ("The Identities of the Mythological
Figures in the 'Cross Group'") is shown in profile with a barbel
growing out of his cheek (see illustration: "Sacrifice yet
again, even
do it to yourselves!"). The scene depicted takes place not far
beyond the one in the present passage [see notes *(317)-*(321)]. It
should be noted that among the Pokomchi Maya Xbalanque gave his name
to a fish of the perch and bass family (see Xbalanque in the

Page 169 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Glossary), whose members lack the barbels that characterize catfish
and (unlike catfish) have spiny fins. It may be that for speakers of
Quichean languages (who include the Pokomchi) Hunahpu manifested as
a catfish and Xbalanque as a perch or bass, but it remains to be
seen whether their classic counterparts might be sorted out between
two different fish.
Taking our cue from the fact that other P.V. episodes involve the
establishment of customs by Hunahpu and Xbalanque, we may guess that
the casting of their bones in the water (an event they themselves
planned) may have established a fishing ritual. Many fishing cultureson the northwest coast of North America, for example- have rituals
in which the casting of fish bones back in the water results in the
reincarnation of the fish to which they belonged. When we combine this
possibility with the fact that Hunahpu and Xbalanque also
established a ritual for the perpetuation of the life of corn
plants, it brings to mind the raised-field complex among the classic
lowland Maya, who harvested fish from the same ditches that drained
their cornfields (see Hammond, Ancient Maya Civilization, pp. 160-63).
Contemporary Quiches do not link corn with fish, but the founders of
the leading Quiche lineages came from the Gulf-coast lowlands, and a
later generation of lords obtained the hieroglyphic P.V. from the
lowlands.
*(307) vagabonds: This is my translation of meba, given by B. and X.
as "poor person"; I have chosen "vagabonds" because Hunahpu and
Xbalanque later disclaim any attachment to a particular place. At this
point in their career they probably correspond to the so-called
"year-bearers" or "possum actors" of the lowland Maya, and this is
probably the point at which they earned the epithets Hunahpu Possum,
Hunahpu Coyote (see Glossary).
*(308) They seemed unrefined: This is mana chibananta quiuach,
literally "not-yet that-get-to-be-done their-faces"; ban uach is an
idiom meaning "polished, adorned" (B.).
*(309) Now Xibalba was full of admiration: The "admiration" is
cayic, translated on the basis of cai3, "watch admiringly" (B.).
*(310) Next they would sacrifice themselves, one of them dying for
the other: This would seem to indicate that either of the twins
could assume either role in this act. When the P.V. describes the act,
it is Xbalanque who sacrifices Hunahpu, but the classic Maya vase that
portrays this scene shows it the other way around (see
illustration:
"Sacrifice yet again, even do it to yourselves!"). In terms of
consistency within the P.V. the former arrangement makes more sense,
since the sacrifice includes decapitation and since it is otherwise
Hunahpu who gets dismembered; by this time he has already suffered a
decapitation by a snatch-bat, having previously lost his arm to
Seven Macaw.
*(311) had to keep coming back: The verb stem here is machcay,
translated on the basis of machcai3, "to come and go repeatedly" (B.).
*(312) Feigning great humility: This is quemochochic; B. gives

Page 170 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

mochochic as "to humble oneself hypocritically."
*(313) they bowed their heads all the way to the ground: This is
chiquixulela quiuach, in which the second word is "their faces"; B.
gives xulela as "throwing the face on the ground."
*(314) down to the rags, to the tatters: The "rags" are mayoquih,
translated on the basis of maquih, "to throw out"; the "tatters" are
atziac [a4,iak], which carries this meaning in both classical and
modern Quiche.
*(315) their mountain: This is quihuyubal, "their-mountain-place."
Huyubal is a metonym for almost any settlement, but especially a
fortified town or "citadel" (tinamit), located on a defensible
elevation.
*(316) And they showed its roundness: This is xquicoloba cut
[xqui4oloba 4ut] chiquiuach, "they-positioned-round-thing then
to-their-faces."
*(317) his legs, his arms were spread wide: The verb here is
xperepoxic, apparently a complete (x-), passive (-xic), and
reduplicated form of pere-, "to put a wide thing somewhere" (V.); B.
has an entry for perrepic, "wide." The limbs of Mesoamerican sacrifice
victims were indeed spread wide.
*(318) was smothered in a leaf: This is xcheque [xcheke] chuuach
tzalic [4,alic], "stanched in-face-of leaf-wrapping." X. gives
4hekelic as "stop the flow of" and 4,alic as "leaves for wrapping."
This line has caused much confusion, but Andres Xiloj found it crystal
clear. He commented that 4,alic refers to any leaves used to wrap
tamales, of which there are several different kinds.
*(319) "Do it to us! Sacrifice us!": Here Andres Xiloj remarked, "It
didn't please them that they were perfectly well; what pleased them
was to be butchered."
*(320) "After all, aren't you Death?": Edmonson has pointed out
the irony of this statement (The Book of Counsel, p. 138). "Death"
is cam here, lacking any suffixes, which leaves it open to various
interpretations: caminak, "dead person"; camical, the ordinary term
for "death"; or came, "Death" as the proper name of a day on the
calendar and of the two highest lords of Xibalba, One and Seven Death.
Hunahpu and Xbalanque also played on the name came in an earlier
passage [see note *(278)].
*(321) heart sacrifice: The stem here is xaraxo-; B. gives xaraxoh
as "cut or open the chest and take out the heart."
*(322) countless ants: This may or may not be metaphorical; if
not, it may be that the fate of the vassals of the lords of Xibalba
was to become the ants of today. In any case it is very unusual for
"vassals" to come downward to get to where their lords are; it would
seem that the domain of Xibalba is the reverse of earthly domains,
where lords are situated in citadels rather than at the bottoms of
canyons.
*(323) no cleanly blotted blood for you: This is chahom quic [4hahom
qui4], literally "washed blood." I take this to be a reference to
autosacrifice, in which the blood that flowed from self-inflicted

Page 171 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

pricks and wounds was blotted up with paper or leaves. This is no
longer done today, but Andres Xiloj pointed out that it is still
said of the Xibalbans that they collect blood that is spilled on the
ground- that is, dirty blood.
*(324) just griddles, just gourds, just brittle things broken to
pieces: The "griddles" are xot, for toasting tortillas; the "gourds"
are acam, translated on the basis of akem, "gourd" (V.); the
"brittle things" are chuch, which B. glosses as "delicate, thin";
and "broken to pieces" is xheraxic, translated on the basis of
hera-, "crumble" (V.). This list suggests the contemporary ritual of
the days Seven 4,ii and Eight Ba4, (Seven Dog and Eight Monkey) at
Momostenango, in which novice daykeepers are initiated. On the eve
of Eight Monkey, the novice is visited at home by his or her
teacher, who breaks a large and previously unused jar and burns
copal incense in the shards; the ashes of the copal are put in a small
gourd. The next day the shards and the gourd are taken to a shrine
called 4huti Zabal or "Little Place of Declaration" and deposited
there (see B. Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya, pp. 65-66 for
more details). But this ritual is dedicated primarily to the Mundo
(earth deity) and the ancestors; there is no mention of Xibalba in its
liturgy. Perhaps the Quiche elite of pre-Columbian times was given
to defaming the indigenous highland Guatemalan religion as Xibalban in
the same way that Christian missionaries have since defamed it as
Satanic.
*(325) born in the light, begotten in the light: Andres Xiloj
pointed out that only human beings can be referred to in this way;
note the contrast with "creatures of the meadows and clearings" in the
previous sentence. The point is that the lords of Xibalba will
henceforth be denied proper human sacrifices.
*(326) the blame is clear: The idiom here is chac umac, "to make
clear one's sin" (B.).
*(327) And you will hear petitions over headed-up sap: This is
quixtaon puch chuui ri quic [qui4] holomax, "you-listen and over the
blood (sap) headed-up." Elsewhere I have translated qui4 holomax as
"nodules of sap." What this sentence means is that henceforth, when
people pray to the Xibalbans, they will burn nodules of the sap of
croton trees (see croton in the Glossary) as offerings.
*(328) they are inciters to wrongs and violence: Andres Xiloj
commented: "They are the ones who send one to do evil. It is as if, in
spirit, they enter us, into the head. I think, 'I'm going to do
such-and-such a thing,' but I don't know who put this bad idea into
me."
*(329) masters of perplexity: This is ahlatzab, consisting of ah-,
"person or owner of"; latz, "embarrassed, perplexed" (B.); and -ab,
plural.
*(330) crying and calling out: What the grandmother of Hunahpu and
Xbalanque does is coquic caziquin [co3ic cazi4in], translated
literally here, but in both classical and contemporary Quiche the
combination of the verb stems o3- ("cry") and zi4- ("call out"),

Page 172 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

used in that order, refers to the act of praying. This is generally
done in a mildly insistent tone rather than a sorrowful one, but the
petitioner is nevertheless thought of as seeking pity; the amplitude
of the voice is generally low to moderate, but those who are addressed
by a prayer are thought of as being summoned from a distance.
*(331) the corn ears they left planted: These are the corn ears
Hunahpu and Xbalanque dedicated when they left for Xibalba. "They left
planted" is xquitic canoc [canok], "they-plant left," an idiom
referring to the establishment of a ritual obligation. Andres Xiloj
recognized one of the obligations of the contemporary mother-father
(patrilineage head) in this passage: "What was 'left planted' was a
custom. They left it 'planted' that because of the corn, they would
never be forgotten. Now, this is the uinel [a pair of shrines
located near a cornfield, one above it and the other below]. When
the corn is ripe one has to give thanks, to burn copal in the uinel.
One gives thanks so that the seeds will have to sprout again; one
carries the corn there to have it at the burning place, and when one
is finished praying one passes the ears through the smoke of the
copal, saying are 4u ua ru4ux [this here is that which is its
heart]. This is what their grandmother must have done in the Popol
Vuh. And after the ears are passed through the smoke they are placed
in the center of the house, in the middle of our crop. They are not
eaten until another crop is ripe." Although these dedicated ears are
not used as seed corn, they are thought of as alive, and it is because
"the heart of the corn has not died" that the seed corn is able to
sprout and that even the stored corn is able to continue multiplying.
It would seem that Hunahpu and Xbalanque, in addition to their
aspects as Venus, year-bearing vagabond actors, and (eventually) the
sun and moon, are also maize deities. The rites of the uinel are
performed on two successive days bearing the names Queh and 3anil,
"Deer" and "Yellowness (or Ripeness)," with the latter being the
principal day (B. Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya, pp. 77, 80).
There are fixed rites each 260 days on Seven Deer and Eight
Yellowness; planting rites are carried out on the Deer and
Yellowness days nearest the actual planting time, and harvest rites
are carried out on the days nearest the actual harvest. The day
corresponding to Yellowness (named Lamat in Yucatec) also figures
prominently in the Venus table of the Dresden Codex, where it is the
first day of the morning star that begins the third of five full Venus
cycles and the first day of disappearance for both morning and evening
stars during the fourth Venus cycle. It may be that at least
portions of these Venus cycles symbolize the life cycle of the maize
plant; indeed, the lowland Maya maize god is actually depicted at
the bottom of the page dealing with the third cycle.
*(332) And this was when their grandmother burned something: That
is, when the corn dried up (ripened), coinciding with the burning of
Hunahpu and Xbalanque in the oven.
*(333) the ears were deified by their grandmother: "Were deified" is
xcabauilax [x4abauilax], "complete-deify-passive," which could also be

Page 173 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

translated "made into an idol," not in the sense of an image but as an
object of adoration.
*(334) the corn ears had been placed up above an earthen floor: This
is chuui chata [4hata] uleu quitic ui ah, "above bed (or slab or
table) earth they-plant to corn-ear," which makes it quite clear
that the corn was not "planted" in any ordinary sense of the word- not
that one would plant corn ears in the first place.
*(335) their father: Note that the term for father (kahau) is
extended to Seven Hunahpu in this passage; he is the younger brother
of One Hunahpu, who is the actual father of Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
In a sense One Hunahpu (or at least his head) has long since come back
to life, but Seven Hunahpu, whose head and body were both buried at
the Place of Ball Game Sacrifice, has been dead all this time.
Therefore Hunahpu and Xbalanque's attempt at a revival of the dead
is directed at Seven Hunahpu.
*(336) he was asked to name everything: The notion here is that
articulate speech, with clearly enunciated words, is analogous to a
clearly recognizable human face. Seven Hunahpu is not able to
articulate the names of all the parts of his face because he has
very few parts beyond the ones he does name, having been reduced to
bones. The "meat" of his face is irreversibly lost, just as One
Hunahpu has said the meat of a dead man's face would be lost.
*(337) each of his former parts: This is ri uhunal puil, "the
its-each formerness"; I translated puil on the basis of puhil,
"antiquity" (B.).
*(338) "You will be prayed to here": Andres Xiloj saw this as the
beginning of the veneration of the dead. He explained that when
there is a death in the patrilineage, the funeral rites are not
complete until the mother-father goes to the lineage shrines on a
Hunahpu day that falls after the actual death. There he prays that the
lingering soul of the deceased, which is a spark of light, might
pass on into the cool, dark room of the underworld, from which it
may later have the good fortune to rise into the sky. The number of
the Hunahpu day is chosen according to the age and importance of the
deceased, with a very low number for a small child and a high one
for a very old person who occupied important offices. With or
without a recent death Hunahpu days are appropriate for visiting the
graves of relatives, where prayers are said and offerings are burned
in much the same way as at lineage shrines, except that the entire
family can go along and make a day of it, taking along a picnic
lunch and strong drink.
*(339) "you will be the first to have your day kept": This may refer
specifically to the day Seven Hunahpu, but it probably means Hunahpu
days in general, regardless of their number prefix.
*(340) "your name will not be lost": Andres Xiloj, who is the
mother-father for his own patrilineage, remarked: "This is just the
way it is with our family. The first man who lived in this place was
named Gaspar Xiloj, but we are still remembering him right now. Gaspar
is the first generation, the second is Juan, the third is Sabino,

Page 174 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

the fourth is Antonio, the fifth is ourselves, but we are still
remembering all of them. That's what it's talking about here in the
Popol Vuh." He added that ideally, a mother-father would be able to
call upon nine or even thirteen generations of predecessors, all of
them having lived on the same lands (see the Introduction for a
discussion of the naming of predecessors within the P.V. itself).
The list of people invoked in prayers should also include the
spouses of all these men (with their maiden names); the writers of the
P.V. name the women only for the first generation.
*(341) the sun belongs to one and the moon to the other: This is hun
cu [4u] quih [3ih] hun nai pu ic [i4] chique, "one then sun one also
and moon to-them." The text does not say that they literally became
the sun and moon. From the general order of mention of Hunahpu and
Xbalanque and the order of mention of the sun and moon in the
present passage, it would appear that the sun pertains to Hunahpu
and the moon to Xbalanque. But Thompson noted that except for this
passage and a contemporary Cakchiquel myth, all the sources on Mayan
peoples (including the contemporary Quiche) cast the moon as a
woman, and he argued that the male moon of the P.V. was the result
of an influence from outside Mayan culture (Maya History and Religion,
pp. 234, 368). Lounsbury, following Thompson, argues that Xbalanque in
particular is properly a solar rather than a lunar deity, one of his
principal pieces of evidence being that among the contemporary
Kekchi Maya, one of the names of the sun god is Xbalam3e, in which
3e is "day" and once meant "sun" ("The Identities of the
Mythological Figures in the 'Cross Group'"). As for Hunahpu,
Thompson associates him with both the sun (Maya History and
Religion, p. 234) and Venus (p. 368), whereas Lounsbury casts
Xbalanque as "the" Maya sun god and assigns Hunahpu (or the equivalent
of Hunahpu at Palenque) to Venus alone.
There are at least three major problems with any attempt to give
unambiguous astronomical assignments to Hunahpu and Xbalanque- or to
their counterparts at Palenque, the gods designated G-I and G-III. The
first is that a single celestial light need not be assigned to a
single god; in the P.V., at least, one of the five Venus cycles, the
first, is assignable neither to Hunahpu nor Xbalanque but to their
father, One Hunahpu (see the Introduction), and Thompson notes that
the classic Maya personification of the sun takes several different
forms (Maya History and Religion, pp. 237, 239, 281). The second
problem is the converse of the first, which is that a single god
need not be limited to a single astronomical assignment. The P.V.
treats a given celestial phenomenon as a "sign" (retal) or (in the
case of the rising sun) a "reflection" (lemo) of a past event; given
that Hunahpu and Xbalanque undergo various transformations and take on
various disguises in the course of their adventures, there is no
reason to suppose that if the sun and moon (or aspects thereof) are
signs or reflections of their past actions, all other celestial
phenomena are thereby eliminated.
A third major problem with giving simple assignments to Hunahpu

Page 175 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

and Xbalanque is that Quiches do not limit the use of 3ih, "sun" or
"day," to words or expressions for solar phenomena, and the same may
have been true of writers who used glyphic elements meaning "sun" in
classic inscriptions. In the P.V. the morning star is called iko3ih,
"day (or sun) bringer" (see the Glossary), and contemporary Quiches
use 3ih as a figure of speech for the full moon (see the
Introduction). A colonial source reports an occasion on which the
Quiches "saw three suns in one day" (Carmack, The Quiche Mayas, p.
129); this was probably a day that began with Venus as the morning
star and ended with the rising of the full moon. Returning to the
P.V., the fact that Xbalanque (or Xbalan3e) may have "sun" in his name
need not mean that he is "the" Maya sun god, nor does it disqualify
him from having a lunar aspect. And given that balan can mean "hidden"
in classic inscriptions and is used to designate human lords who
have passed into the underworld at death (Schele, Notebook, p. 118),
it could be that Xbalanque was specifically responsible for the
night-time sun (the one in the underworld), and that he became visible
on the surface of the earth once a month as the full moon. That
would leave the daytime sun open to Hunahpu.
*(342) They became the sky's own stars: Earlier we were told that
the Four Hundred Boys correspond specifically to the Pleiades.
PART FOUR
*(343) they sought and discovered: The root of the latter verb is
canaizah, translated on the basis of caneizah, "discover, find" (B.).
*(344) the animals who brought the food: Andres Xiloj pointed out
that all four of these animals eat corn. Of the birds he said,
"There are birds that take the kernels from the crop and carry them
off to hide them. When the time comes they still know where they are
and go to eat them. When they don't find where they left them, a
garden is created there."
*(345) Xmucane did the grinding nine times: Andres Xiloj
commented: "The first time corn is ground it is broken open. The
second time, it is somewhat fine. The third time is finer." He
indicated that ordinarily corn would not be ground nine times; that
would be very fine indeed.
*(346) the water she rinsed her hands with: This is ha ropenal in
the MS.; Andres Xiloj read it as the haa (water) a woman uses to
wash off rupenal, which is the corn meal that sticks to the hands
during grinding.
*(347) with yellow corn, white corn alone for the flesh: This
reminded Andres Xiloj of a saying used today: uhral 3anuach, xolob,
"We are the children [specifically a woman's children] of yellow-faced
corn, spotted corn."
*(348) They walked, they worked: The second verb here is xechapanic,
literally "they grasped," but Andres Xiloj suggested "worked," since
work is done with the hands. Quiches think of the extremities
together; walking and using the hands are the physical counterparts of
articulate speech. Note that the linking of speech and walking is made
explicit in the statement "Isn't your speech good, and your walk?"

Page 176 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(349) It was as if they were asteep: Note that this passage seems
to allude to Genesis, but that it disagrees with Genesis on four
crucial points. First, it was only "as if" (quehe) the men were asleep
when the women were made, and they were "wider awake" afterward- qui
xe4aztahic, "really (or very) they-got-to-be-alive (or awake)."
Second, there were four men and then four women, not one and one.
Third, the women were not made from parts of men but were made
separately from men. Fourth, sexual differences already existed
among the gods.
*(350) ladies of rank: This is xoccohauab [xokohauab], literally
"women-lords."
*(351) penitents and sacrificers: This is ahquix (sometimes ahquixb)
ahcahb [ah4ixb ah4ahb], in which ah- is occupational; V. gives 4ixb as
"shame" and E. gives 4ahb as "sacrifice, idolize." 4ixb is probably
a verbal form of 4ix, "spine," and 4ahb probably has the same root
as 4ahinic, "punish" (X.). The reference is to the penitential
autosacrifice of blood, a widespread practice in pre-Columbian
Mesoamerica.
*(352) thirteen allied tribes, thirteen principalities: This is
oxlahuh uca amac [ama3] oxlahuh tecpan, in which oxlahuh is "thirteen"
and ama3 is "tribe." Tecpan is Nahua for "royal house or palace" or
"put something in order" (D.); in the Quiche context it seems to be
a term for a tribe that is organized under a recognized noble house,
but a house that is tributary (at least ideally) to the larger
Quiche state. The tecpan list in this passage contains fifteen names
rather than thirteen; some of the names may be subdivisions of
larger entities, or some may be synonyms, or else the number
thirteen is simply an ideal figure rather than a literal count.
That leaves the question of how to translate uca, which requires
appeal to the only other passage in the entire P.V. that combines ama3
and tecpan in parallel construction (Part Five, "And Bearded Place
is the name of..."): uuc amac [ama3] quib quiticpan [quitecpan]
quib, in which quib is "themselves." It stands to reason that uca in
the first passage should be the same as uuc in the second passage.
By itself the latter form might be read as uukub, "seven," but that is
disconfirmed by the fact that there are thirteen uca ama3 in the
earlier passage. I translate both uca and uuc as "allied" on the basis
of two entries in B.: uuquih [probably uu4ih], "to make a friend," and
uuq [probably uu4], "friend"; these forms are probably related to
the prepositional root -u4, "with."
*(353) each one a division of that citadel: This is probably a
reference to Tulan Zuyua, a place that will not be properly
discussed until later.
*(354) And there were mountain people: Here the P.V. follows the
lines of Toltecan myths of national origin, exemplified by the claim
of the powerful Aztecs (or Mexicans) to a humble past as Chichimec
hunters and gatherers. The ancestors of the Quiches and related tribes
will later be described as being "adorned with mere animal hides," and
the Quiche ancestors in particular will be described as hunters of

Page 177 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

deer, birds, and larvae who stay apart from more populous tribes.
*(355) for all the mountain people there was just one language: I
have supplied "mountain people" here; the intent seems to be to
separate the mountain people (including the Quiche ancestors) from
others who were in the east, including "people of many languages."
*(356) They did not yet pray to wood and stone: That is, they had
not yet received the objects whose spirit familiars would become their
tribal gods.
*(357) lifting their faces to the sky: Andres Xiloj explained: "When
one prays, as here, asking for things, one looks to heaven;
afterwards, when waiting for the blessing, one looks to earth."
*(358) "as long as there is day, as long as there is light": This is
an alternate translation of the line discussed in note *(154) ("in the
course of the days"). In the present context Andres Xiloj commented:
"Today one says kabe 3ih, kabe zak [our-road day, our-road light].
This is the time that goes forward; it is the road of time, the number
of years one is going to live, or the number of times there will be
until the end of the world."
*(359) "will it be": This line has been translated as a question
because it begins with quita, which B. gives as "what" or "how."
*(360) "a good life and beginning": Andres Xiloj commented: "These
words would be used in prayer when someone was setting up a new
household."
*(361) they made their fasts: The verb stem here is quilonic,
translated on the basis of 3ilonic, translated on the basis of
3ilonic, "avoid, abstain" (X.).
*(362) watching intently: This is zelauachin, translated on the
basis of zelauachih, "to view with close attention" (listed under
zeleuachih in B.).
*(363) He pivoted inside his sandal: The verb phrase here is xubac
uloc [xubak ulok], "he drilled hither"; V. gives bak as "to drill."
Just as he promised, Tohil gave his followers fire even when others
had lost theirs; his "sandal" was presumably the platform of a fire
drill. The classic Maya antecedent of Tohil, who also possesses
fire, is the personage designated only as G-II or God K in the past
literature, but whose name at Palenque is now known to have been
Tahil, "Torch Mirror" or "Obsidian Mirror" (Linda Schele and Floyd
G. Lounsbury, personal communications); he is typically shown with a
burning torch sticking out of the mirror he wears on his forehead.
As Michael Coe had previously pointed out (The Maya Scribe, pp. 16,
116), God K is the Mayan cognate of the Nahua god named Tezcatlipoca
or "Smoking Mirror." The Tohil of the P.V. is like Tezcatlipoca in
demanding human sacrifice; it remains to be seen if the same was
true of Tahil at Palenque. Tahil often takes the form of the
"manikin scepter" (Thompson, Maya History and Religion, pp. 225-26),
an object carried by classic rulers (see illustration:
"They've come
to ask for your fire"). In this form he is like Tezcatlipoca in having
only one leg (the other "leg," when present, takes the form of a

Page 178 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

serpent). This suggests that Tohil may be a manifestation of Hurricane
or Hurakan (literally "One leg"); see also note *(516).
*(364) they got no response: The verb here is xeculaxic, "they
were [not] answered"; B. glosses cula as "respond."
*(365) place of emergence: This is tzuquibal [4,uquibal], in which
-bal is "place of"; V. glosses 4,uc as "spring forth, sprout."
*(366) And then a person showed himself: At this point in the MS.
Ximenez, who otherwise confines his own parenthetical remarks to the
Spanish translation in the right-hand column of each page, inserts a
remark into the left-hand column, otherwise reserved for the Quiche
text. As if avoiding an impropriety, he uses Latin, writing "Demonio
loquens eis." The writers of the P.V. probably intended their own
allusion to Christian demonology in this passage, since they
describe the person under discussion as having the wings of a bat
and as coming from Xibalba (the underworld), but note that they make
this allusion at the expense of the Cakchiquels, the principal
rivals of the Quiches, whose god, they say, "looks like a bat." To
this day a great many Cakchiquel men wear jackets with a bat motif
on the back.
*(367) the representation: This is quexuach [4exuach], literally
"substitute-face," which B. glosses as "resemblance" (under the
entry for quexel); Andres Xiloj offered the same reading.
*(368) They were simply overwhelmed: This is xa quiculu, in which xa
is "just" and qui- is "they"; culu is translated on the basis of culum
[4ulum], "dismay" (B.).
*(369) groping along: The verb stem here is chacchot, translated
on the basis of chacacha, "to go like a blind person" (B.).
*(370) they had covetous mouths and covetous faces: This is
chiquimah quichi [chii] chiquimah quiuach. The combination of mah
("rob") with chii ("mouth") and uach ("face") is an idiom meaning
"to be pained by not having something to trade with or something one
has need of" (under mah in V.). A more literal translation of the
present example would be something like "They had thieving mouths
and thieving faces."
*(371) "Wasn't it found and wasn't it revealed": This is a
divinatory phrase, much like the one used by Xpiyacoc and Xmucane at
the beginning of their divinatory question concerning the making of
humans from wood. The verb stems in both cases are culu [4ulu] and
rico [riko], "encounter" and "find." In the present context the
implication is that those who want fire claim a kinship with those who
already have it on the basis of some past divinatory reading rather
than on the basis of a clear genealogy. This is what anthropologists
call "fictive kinship"; it may have been standard practice in highland
Guatemala to include divinatory readings in the negotiation of such
relationships.
*(372) "Don't they want to be suckled?": Throughout this passage I
follow Edmonson in translating tunic [tuunic] as having to do with
suckling (The Book of Counsel, p. 168), a meaning found in both
classical and modern Quiche. In the present context the suckling is

Page 179 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

a metaphor for sacrifice by removal of the heart. It may be the horror
of this metaphor that has caused translators to pass over it
heedlessly; even Edmonson's note on the subject suggests that mere
sacrifice by self-bleeding is meant. The place where Tohil desires
to do his suckling is "on their sides and under their arms," which
fits with what is known about Mesoamerican heart sacrifice: the
incision ran all the way to the sides of the chest (Francis Robicsek
and Donald Hales, "Maya Heart Sacrifice"). The next sentence, "Isn't
it their heart's desire to embrace me?" is not only a statement
about motivation but a further reference to heart sacrifice. Tohil
is no mere suckler of breasts; what he wants from those who embrace
him is deep inside the breast, and he wants the whole thing.
*(373) They made no delay: The text has maui xquiquiyaluh, in
which I take the second word to be an error for xquiyaluh; yaluh is
"to delay oneself" (B.), giving "not complete-they-delay" for the
whole phrase.
*(374) This deed had not yet been attempted: The verb stem here is
tihou, translated on the basis of tihouic, "try, practice" (X.).
*(375) the new daybringer: "New" is my translation of raxa, which
could also be "raw"; I assume that the reference is to the first
appearance of Venus as morning star after a period of invisibility.
*(376) they left the east: The verb stem here is canah, "to leave"
(B.).
*(377) "where we belong": This is cohtique ui, "incomplete-we-stop";
B. glosses tequeic as "to stop."
*(378) "bleeding your ears and passing a cord through your
elbows": The verbs here are hutic, "to let blood" (B.), and ziza,
translated on the basis of tzizo, "to sew a seam, to string [like
beads]; formerly, to let blood for sacrifice to idols" (B.). The
"ears" and "elbows" are xiquin and chuc [4huc]. Ears are well attested
throughout Mesoamerica as sites for the drawing of blood in rites of
self-sacrifice, but elbows are mentioned only for the Quiche, in
both the P.V. and in B. (under the entry for tzizo). Michael D. Coe
has pointed out to me that the penis was a primary site for the
drawing of blood among the classic Maya. In the present passage chuc
(if it is not 4huc) could conceivably be related to chu3a or chu3ab,
"strength, energy, vigor" (V. and X.), and thus allude to the penis,
but this seems unlikely, given that B. confirms the elbow as a site
for drawing blood.
*(379) camping on the road: This is xucanahibeh ri pa be,
literally "it was left in the road."
*(380) In unity: This is chiquihunam uach, "in-their-one face," an
idiom given in X. as hunam quiuach, "in agreement," and in B. as
hunamah uach, "to make friends."
*(381) They were just smelling the tips of their staffs: Andres
Xiloj commented: "Perhaps these staffs had some secret. Perhaps they
were of a wood like cherry, which has the odor of the fruit."
*(382) packed ... on their backs: The verb stem here is eca [eka],
"to carry on the shoulders or back" (B.).

Page 180 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(383) above a great red river: This is chuui hun nima ca3ha
[cakhaa], "on-top one great red-river." Given that the writers of
the P.V. usually transcribe both "house" (ha) and "water (or river)"
(haa) as ha, this could also be "great red house." Red was perhaps the
commonest color for the stuccoed exteriors of Mayan public
buildings, going all the way back to the pre-classic.
*(384) on a bare mountain: This is zaqui [zaki] huyub, literally
"white mountain," but zaki is sometimes used to mean "plain" (in the
sense of unadorned). I take it that the writers mean to contrast the
situation of Hacauitz with that of Auilix and Tohil, both of whom seem
to be "in a great forest" even though the latter, like Hacauitz, is on
a mountain.
*(385) Masses of serpents ... jaguars, rattlesnakes, yellowbites
were there in the forest where he was hidden: Today in Momostenango
the shrines on the high mountains that bound the community, together
with the shrine (atop a very high waterfall) used by those who
organize and play parts in the Monkey Dance, are all said to be
haunted by dangerous animals. Such animals appear to those whose
ritual office does not entitle them to visit a particular shrine; they
also appear to those who have a right to visit but have failed to
abstain from sexual or violent acts (whether verbal or physical) on
the day of their arrival at the shrine.
*(386) they stopped there: The verb stem here is tacotob, translated
on the basis of ta3atobic, "to stop and not move forward" (under
ta3aba in B.).
*(387) They cried their hearts and their guts out: Asked why, Andres
Xiloj said, "They were sad in the darkness, there was no light, no
day, no night, all the time it was dark." The Quiche do not think of
night as simply "dark" as opposed to "light" [see in the early dawn in
note *(69)]. The conditions before the first dawn of the P.V. were
so bad that one could not even speak properly of night, with its
moon and stars and even a faint trace of dawn, to say nothing of the
full light of day.
*(388) the gods who were ... just out in the bromelias, in the
hanging mosses, not yet set on pedestals: Today bromelias and
hanging mosses (see Glossary) are standard materials in the
construction of temporary outdoor arbors or archways for saints; the
present passage would seem to mean that the gods were put beneath such
arbors, not that they were put up in the trees where bromelias and
hanging mosses actually grow. Only later were the gods "set on
pedestals," presumably in the "houses" at the tops of pyramids.
*(389) their strategies: This is quichacabal [qui4hacabal],
"their-win-instrument."
*(390) Their hearts did not yet harbor ill will: This is mana chilic
cayal ta qui4ux, in which mana is "not yet," ta is a further marker of
the negative, and qui4ux is "their hearts." B. glosses both chilic and
cayal as "ill will, anger."
*(391) they incensed: The verb stem here is zacbiza, translated on
the basis of za3bizah, "to incense" and "to wag [a tail]" (B.). In the

Page 181 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

next sentence I have translated the same verb as "they shook." A
pottery censer of the kind used in Mesoamerica must be shaken or
swayed back and forth to keep the incense burning.
*(392) it is only his reflection that now remains: What might lie
behind this statement is revealed by a contemporary Mopan Maya tale in
which Lord Kin (the sun) goes from his home in the east to the
center of the sky and then back to the east again; it appears that
he goes clear across the sky because he has placed a mirror at its
center (Thompson, Ethnology of the Mayas of Southern and Central
British Honduras, p. 132). To interpret the movements of the sun in
this manner is to model it on Venus as morning star, which both
rises and sets in the east.
*(393) Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz were turned to stone, along
with the idols of the puma, jaguar, rattlesnake, yellowbite, which the
White Sparkstriker took with him into the trees: The "idols" here
are ucabauilal [u4abauilal], "its-god-own," 4abauil being translated
elsewhere as "god." The White Sparkstriker is named immediately
after the yellowbite and could be included in the list of beings who
are turned to stone, but in terms of what is known about him (or
her) today (B. Tedlock, "El C'oxol: un simbolo de la resistencia
quiche") it makes much more sense to treat the name as the subject
of the sentence that follows it, xa xuchap chi uca [u4ah] rib pa che
[chee], "just he/she took that to-accompany him/herself into trees."
Today the White Sparkstriker is the keeper of volcanic concretions and
ancient artifacts that resemble animals; these objects, which are said
to have been petrified when the sun first rose, are called mebil
(the same as the name of the shrine in which they are kept) in
Momostenango and 4amauil in the eastern Quiche area.
Andres Xiloj commented on the passage at hand as follows: "When
all the birds, animals were converted into stone, they remained as
mebil. When the moment comes and one is able to acquire one of
these, this is the mebil. Birds, rabbits, in sum, all the different
kinds of stones. Now the 4oxol [Sparkstriker], this one, yes, he has
money, 'tis said. When one has luck, the 4oxol presents himself. If he
takes off his shoe and leaves it thrown away, then there is the money;
or his little bag- because he has a little bag, and if he leaves it
thrown away, there is the money. This is the mebil of a person; it
is the luck." Lucas Pacheco said that the 4oxol lost his/her shoe when
the sun first rose; the 4oxol escaped petrifaction by running into the
trees, but the shoe did not.
*(394) Perhaps we would have no relief from the voracious animals
today- the puma, jaguar, rattlesnake, yellowbite-... if the original
animals hadn't been turned to stone: "Voracious animals" is tionel
chicop, "biting (or meat-eating) animals." The MS. erroneously adds
the White Sparkstriker to the list of animals in this sentence;
apparently Ximenez (or a copyist) interpreted the previous naming of
the White Sparkstriker (see above) as part of a list of animals and
then assumed that the name must be missing from the present list.
Andres Xiloj commented: "The 4oxol [Sparkstriker] has to take care

Page 182 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

of the animals; he doesn't allow them to go out, because they are
harmful. He keeps them, he has them in a corral." This is the
Sparkstriker in his role as gamekeeper (see B. Tedlock, Time and the
Highland Maya, pp. 181-87); today the dangerous animals only attack
people who have failed in their ritual duties. According to Lucas
Pacheco, the corral where the Sparkstriker keeps his animals is
located deep within a branch of the cave beneath the ruins of Rotten
Cane; in that context they take the form of small stones. The
fortunate may be allowed to take some of these; the unfortunate fall
into a great, wide mouth.
*(395) And the language has differentiated in the case of the
Cakchiquels: In this passage the P.V. presents a theory that
linguistic differentiation correlates with differences in the names
originally assigned to tribal gods. The linguistic observations are
themselves quite accurate (see the Introduction).
*(396) their stay: This is quiabulic, translated on the basis of
yabulic, "to stop" (B.).
*(397) the masking of Tohil: The "masking" is cohbal,
"mask-instrument," apparently referring to the deer costumes discussed
later.
*(398) they bowed down: The verb here is uonouoh, "contract, as in
joining the chin with the knees" (B.).
*(399) Now it was only a manifestation of his genius that spoke when
the penitents and sacrificers came before Tohil: That is to say, the
words came not from the stone itself but from an apparition of its
spirit familiar, which in this case would be a youth.
*(400) All they burned before their gods was resin, just bits of
pitchy bark, along with marigolds: That is to say, they burned
things gathered in nature rather than proper copal (see Glossary). The
resin is 3ol, which may be gathered in gummy nodules from the trunks
of various trees. The bits of pitchy bark are rachak nooh, literally
"leavings of pine resin," pieces of bark on which a hard red resin has
been formed as a result of the holes bored by worms. The species of
marigold in question is a common roadside herb (see Glossary).
According to Andres Xiloj, all of these things are burned as offerings
today in Momostenango, but they constitute a poorer offering than
copal. Earle reports the use of marigolds in the eastern Quiche area
as well ("La etnoecologia quiche"), and I have seen the unburned
remains of bits of bark at a shrine near Chichicastenango.
*(401) Do not reveal us to the tribes: Andres Xiloj compared this
hiding of the gods (or the stones that contain their geniuses) to
the proper treatment of the valuable objects that are called mebil
in the Quiche dialect of Momostenango: "These stones are like mebil.
When one finds one, one must not show it to another person, because
it's for oneself directly. There are persons who find some little
things; they may show them to others, but this mebil won't allow it,
now it won't give good fortune to the person who found it. It
withdraws. If there is some little thing, an ancient coin found in the
woods, or a stone, then one must guard it." See also note *(68).

Page 183 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(402) "they search for us": This is coh3a3anih rumal,
"us-watch-closely by-them"; the verb stem is translated on the basis
of 3a3alinic, "ambushed, surveyed closely" (Q.).
*(403) "don't you let us be hunted down": This is maui
cohiralahobizah, "not incomplete-us-you-hunt (or trap)-cause."
*(404) "female deer and female birds": "Female" is xnam here; V.
gives xnam as "female deer," but in the present passage xnam appears
as an adjective with both "deer" and "birds": xnam queh xnam 4,iquin.
*(405) "deer costumes": These are u queh at the first mention and cu
queh thereafter. B. gives cuu as "clothing"; it should probably be 4uu
on the basis of its resemblance to 4ul, which several other sources
gloss as "clothing."
*(406) "They belong to us already": This is a reference to the
long-standing promise the tribes made in order to get fire, namely,
that they would allow themselves to be "suckled"- that is, to have
their hearts cut out.
*(407) they would then go to anoint the mouth of the stone of
Tohil or Auilix with the blood of the deer or bird: In the eastern
Quiche area today, the mouths of stones (now called 4amauil rather
than 4abauil as here) are more commonly given drinks of distilled
liquor than of blood, but the blood of sacrificed chickens is
sometimes given in the area of Chichicastenango. Drinks of liquor
are also put into the mouths of saints. Ideally the liquid offered
should quickly disappear, as if actually swallowed by the stone or
saint; in the words of the P.V., "And the bloody drink was drunk by
the gods."
*(408) just the larva of the yellow jacket, the larva of the wasp,
and the larva of the bee: Andres Xiloj described these insects, the
uonon, zital, and akah, as follows: "The uonon is large and striped
yellow and black; there is honey in its hive, and it stings. The zital
is bigger and has red stripes. Its bite is more serious than that of
the uonon; it causes a large swelling and one could even die. It, too,
has honey. The akah is small, a little bigger than a fly, and
stings. It makes a nest, with thousands of akah. If one can get it
down with a stick the akah stay up there, then one can get whatever
pieces of honey there are." At present the larvae are eaten only in
the case of the akah.
*(409) "Your right": This is icolbal iuib, in which i- is "you"
and iuib is yourselves" (both plural familiar); B. gives colbalib as
"liberty." This is a reference to the agreement the tribes made to
allow themselves to be sacrificed (see the next note).
*(410) the suckling: This is ri 4,um; some have taken it to be
"pelt," but I translate it on the basis of tzumah [4,umah], "to
suckle" (B.), and take it to be a further reference to the
"suckling" (heart sacrifice) pledged by the tribes (see the previous
note).
*(411) the tracks were merely those of animals: This is cacan
[cakan] ri xa quipich, "their tracks that just their feet," in which
"feet" (pich) is specifically "the feet of quadrupeds" (V.).

Page 184 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(412) dark and rainy: This is quecal [3ekal] hab, literally
"black rain," but referring (according to Andres Xiloj) to a storm
that is so intense that the sky gets very dark. This supports the
notion that Tohil is an aspect of Hurricane [see note *(363)], who
caused a "black rain" when he destroyed the wooden people. In the view
of Lounsbury (personal communication), Tahil, the classic equivalent
of Tohil at Palenque, was also a rain god.
*(413) misty and drizzly: This is muzmul hab, "misty rain." Andres
Xiloj explained: "These are days when it doesn't rain strongly;
instead the drops are small, little bits of water fall. It is muzmul."
*(414) they singled them out and cut them down: The MS. has
echalamicat, in which the only certainty is e, "they." My reading is
based on chala "to pick out among many" (B.), and (following Edmonson,
The Book of Counsel, p. 192) 4at, "cut" (in the sense of "reap").
*(415) "in full blossom": This is chaom, "blossom," a "metaphor
meaning beauty" according to B.
*(416) "radiate preciousness": This is zaclocoh [zaklo3oh], a
combination of "light" (zak) and "valuable" or "precious" (lo3oh).
Andres Xiloj pictured the maidens as twelve to fifteen years old.
*(417) on their hands and knees: This is chacachaxinac
[chacachaxinak], with passive and perfect suffixes (-xinak), which I
translate on the basis of chacachotic, "go on all fours" (B.).
*(418) Tohil and the others: Here and elsewhere in this story I have
supplied "and the others"; the name Tohil is often used to mean all
three gods and may be combined with a plural verb prefix.
*(419) there must come a sign as to whether you really saw their
faces: Note that when Blood Woman went before the head of One Hunahpu,
he gave her a "sign" by spitting in her hand, which made her pregnant;
in this case the signs will be quite different, intended not for the
women but for their fathers.
*(420) they spotted: This is xil quiuach, in which x- is complete
and qui- is "they," translated on the basis of ilauachih, "to look
with attention" (B.).
*(421) on a smooth surface: This is chiyulinic uuach, "on-smooth
its-face"; B. gives yulunic as "a smooth thing." The paintings were on
"the inside" (upam) of the cloaks, and it was this side that went next
to the body of the lord who was then stung by wasps, despite the
"smooth surface."
*(422) He turned around: The verb stem here is zolouic, translated
on the basis of zololic, "to give turns" (B.).
*(423) unfurling it: This is catzonon ucuxic [u3uxic], literally
"he-undresses his-being-covered"; B. gives tzonolic as "undressed."
I take it that this lord opened up his cloak so that everyone could
see the eagle on the inside of it.
*(424) It then became the profession of Xtah and Xpuch to bark
shins: "Bark shins" is my translation of hoxol chec [4hek], based on
the comments of Andres Xiloj: "4hek is the shin bone. Hoxol is 'one
who wounds.' It is the wound that they [the girls] gave them. A girl
or a boy comes to know how the world is [laughs]. Let's suppose we are

Page 185 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

now old people. We can deceive a girl of fifteen or sixteen years, and
there is the wound. The violence. And so a woman can deceive a boy
of fifteen or fourteen years, then there it is. The old woman
wounded the boy [laughs]. This is hoxol 4hek, 'the wounder of
shins.' Only now we say xuporo rakan, 'she burned his legs.'"
*(425) those spirit boys: I have supplied "spirit" to make it
clearer that the reference is to Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz.
*(426) their fortress: Ximenez translates catem as "fortification"
here; B. gives cateh as "to block passage."
*(427) Their eyebrows were plucked out, along with their beards: The
"plucking" here is mich [mi4h], which is elsewhere a metaphor for
deception; this time plucking carries both its literal and
metaphorical meanings.
*(428) made a fence: The "fence" is coxtun, "wall, castle, fence"
(B.). In the next paragraph I translate this same word as "parapet" on
the basis of context.
*(429) They just made a palisade of planks and stakes: The materials
for this structure are tzalam and chut, respectively glossed as
"board" and "stake" by B.; the verb for the making of the palisade
is quehbeh, translated on the basis of quehom che, "palisaded" (B.).
This was definitely not stonework.
*(430) around their citadel: This is rih quitinamit, which is
misleading when translated literally as "its-back their-citadel." Rih,
when applied to a house, means the side or sides that face the outside
world, whereas uuach, "its-face," means the side or sides that face
the patio; I assume that the same scheme was analogously applied to
a citadel. That is to say, a citadel turned its "back" to the
outside world and its "face" inward. This interpretation is
confirmed by the entry for cotoh chirih tinamit in B., literally
"surround at-its-back citadel" but glossed (following European
reckoning) as the "face of a fortress."
*(431) They surrounded the citadel: The verb stem here is
cotcomih, a reduplicated form meaning "surround" (B.).
*(432) eight hundred score,... thirty times eight hundred: This is
my attempt to translate Mayan numbers into English without
completely converting them from the vegesimal system to the decimal
one; "score" in English is of course a remnant of vegesimal reckoning.
The numbers in the text are cachui and oxchui, "2 x 8,000" and "3 x
8,000," 8,000 being the third power of 20 and filling the same place
in a vegesimal system that 1,000 fills in a decimal system.
*(433) they just enjoyed the spectacle: The verb stem here is cai,
"to watch admiringly, like watching dances" (listed under cai3 in B.).
*(434) their legs, their arms: As Andres Xiloj pointed out, this
is an idiom meaning "all over their bodies."
*(435) they were doubling over: The verb stem here is uon,
translated on the basis of uonih, "to be doubled over so that the
knees meet the chin" (B.).
*(436) stumbling: The verb stem here is lahahic, a reduplicated
form, translated on the basis of lahab, "snare" (B.).

Page 186 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(437) they were hit: Edmonson has qiyaq [kiyak], "poisoned," here
(The Book of Counsel, p. 208), but the MS. has cac, which I
translate on the basis of ca3o, "hit with stones" (B.).
*(438) gasping for breath: This is quehilouic quepolou, probably
an idiom for heavy or laborious breathing; hilouic is "sigh of
tiredness" and polou is "breath" (both in B.).
*(439) "our own tribal place": This could be all the way back at the
place where they were before arriving at Tulan Zuyua.
*(440) "Again it is the time of our Lord Deer": "It is the time"
is my translation of cholan, "order" (in the sense of sequence).
"Our Lord Deer" is a reference to one of the twenty day names of the
260-day divinatory cycle. At present a day addressed in prayer is
always prefaced with the title "Lord," but the number prefix of the
day is specified- for example, ahau hun queh, "Lord One Deer." One
of the few contexts in which days may be addressed or referred to by
name alone is that of prayers to or stories about the mam, the only
four day names that can serve to mark a new solar year. Deer is one of
these days, and it seems likely that the present passage refers to the
day named Deer in its capacity as a mam. For speculation that the
specific day in question was One Deer, see the Introduction.
*(441) "Go see the place where we came from": Given that Jaguar
Quitze and the others have already said that they themselves are going
to "our own tribal place," it is difficult to interpret their
instructions to their sons. Perhaps the answer is that the fathers are
going in spirit, whereas their sons will make a pilgrimage in the
flesh. Also, the sons will not go until some time later. In any
case, the irreducible difference between the journey of the fathers
and that later undertaken by the sons is that the former are never
seen again.
*(442) "for making requests": This is tanabal [taanabal],
"asking-instrument." Andres Xiloj remarked, "It's like a place to burn
offerings. But this word is only used for places that are open to
the public, not for shrines that only a mother-father [patrilineage
head] can visit."
*(443) "fiery splendor": This is my translation of 3a3al,
"fire-ness" or "hot-ness," a frequent metaphor for the glories and
splendors of lordly dominance over others.
*(444) downtrodden: This is yocotahinac, translated on the basis
of yo3o, "step on" (B.).
*(445) All those on Hacauitz: This phrase has been supplied in order
to distinguish the inhabitants of the citadel of Hacauitz from the
"broken and downtrodden" tribes.
*(446) the day of the bundle: This may have been the day named
Deer, mentioned by the departing Quiche ancestors on the same occasion
as the presentation of the bundle. Today this day is associated, above
all others, with mother-fathers, the priest-shamans who perform
rites for lineages, cantons, and an entire town (according to their
rank). All mother-fathers, as well as the ordinary daykeepers who rank
just below them, possess a sacred bundle, but this bundle contains

Page 187 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

divining paraphernalia and is opened frequently.
PART FIVE
*(447) who represented all the Cauecs: This is rech ronohel
cauiquib, literally "of (or belonging to) all the Cauecs." There are
similar phrases in the sentences dealing with the Greathouses and Lord
Quiches in this same passage.
*(448) judge: This is catol [3atol] tzih, at present 3atal tzih (X.)
or (in the dialect of Momostenango) 3atbal tzih, "reap-instrument [of]
words."
*(449) From across the sea, they brought back the writings about
Tulan. In the writings, in their words, they spoke of having cried:
The MS. reads as follows: xquicam [xqui4am] ula ri chaca [chaka]
palo utzibal [u4,ibal] tulan utzibal xe4ha chire quioquinac
[quio3inak] chupan chupan quitzih. The repetitions of utzibal and
chupan make no sense unless we assume a scribal transposition;
moving the second utzibal to a position immediately after the first
chupan gives the following reading: "they-brought back the from-across
sea its-writings Tulan, they-talked about having-cried inside
its-writings, inside their-words." The writers of the P.V. do not
specify whether the "writings about Tulan" and the Council Book (P.V.)
itself were one and the same, but it seems likely, given that one of
the epithets of the Council Book is "The Light That Came from Across
the Sea."
*(450) There were actually four mountains: "Mountains" (huyub), in
referring to settlement, could mean prominences in close proximity and
of any size; for symbolic purposes even a small mound can be called
"mountain" in Quiche.
*(451) they examined: This is xeico chiri chuui, literally "they
passed there above," but Andres Xiloj read it as an idiom meaning
"to look over."
*(452) But their faces did not die: This is mana xucam quiuach,
translated almost literally. The reference is to the eschatology set
forth by One Hunahpu in his lecture to Blood Woman, in which he
says, "Neither dimmed nor destroyed is the face of a lord."
*(453) pain and affliction: This is caxcol [4ax4ol] rail, translated
on the basis of entries in B., where the two words are treated as
synonyms, and on the basis of the entry for 4ax4ol in X.
*(454) They ground their gypsum, their plaster: This seems to be a
metonym for major construction. It may not mean that previous Quiche
sites lacked gypsum plaster, but in the present context it combines
with such phrases as "excellent citadel," "the root of fiery
splendor," and "lords of singular genius" to indicate that the
building of Bearded Place represented a whole new level in the rise of
the Quiche lords.
*(455) one in each: This is my interpolation.
*(456) and that the other lord be allied with them: This is xa cu
[4u] hun ahau xrah cu [cuu] quib, "just then one (other) lord
was-wanted to-keep themselves," in which the translation of cuu is
based on B. The lord in question here is Iztayul, as the next sentence

Page 188 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

makes clear; in the present sentence he is being distinguished from
Cotuha.
*(457) the Ilocs wanted him as their disciple: This is xrah tihox
cumal ilocab, "was-wanted disciple by-them Ilocs"; B. gives tihoxel as
"disciple."
*(458) First they invaded the citadel: This is xcoquibeh nabe
tinamit, literally "they-entered first citadel"; B. gives oquibeh
tinamit as "scale a fortress."
*(459) This was in payment: The "payment" is tohbal,
"pay-instrument," which in this context is a sound play on Tohil,
the principal god before whom the Ilocs were sacrificed, and on the
day name Toh, which was the day of Tohil. This day is still
interpreted by diviners as having to do with the payment of debts;
in making this interpretation they utilize a sound play on the day
name similar to the one used here, moving from toh as a proper name to
the verb tohonic, "pay" (see B. Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya,
p. 155).
*(460) the canyon and the citadel: This is the first of a number
of joint appearances of ziuan, "canyon," and tinamit, "citadel"; taken
together, they seem to encompass both a citadel proper (see Glossary),
in the sense of a high, fortified place with temples and palaces,
and what lies around or below that citadel as well. The effect is to
extend the sense of settlement or community beyond its fortified core,
with temples and palaces, to the surrounding population, creating a
compound concept meaning something like "town" or "city." T. J. Knab
(personal communication) suggests that this expression might be the
Quiche equivalent of the Nahua term for town or city, which also
involves a juxtaposition of the low with the high (in that order):
altepetl, compounded of al (from atl), "water," and tepetl, "mountain"
(D.). The Quiche also use a water-mountain pairing, but it is
applied not to towns but to outdoor shrines, which (ideally) exist
in low-high pairs (see B. Tedlock, Time and the Highland Maya, pp. 76,
80). In sum, the Quiche and Nahua terms for "town," along with the
Quiche pairing of shrines, all involve a juxtaposition of the low
and the high, in that order. Both languages construct their term for
town by pairing complementary metonyms for a town rather than by
reducing the complexity of a town to a unitary abstraction.
*(461) lords of singular genius: "Singular" is humah, translated
on the basis of hunah, "make oneself unique" (B.).
*(462) nothing happened to make fools of them: "To make fools" is my
translation of alachinak, which is given by B. as "joke."
*(463) or to ruin the greatness: This is xaui banol rech nimal, in
which xaui indicates "the same as the aforesaid" and links this clause
to the negative one preceding it; banol is translated "to ruin" on the
basis of banoh, "disaster" (V.); rech is "of their"; and nimal is
"greatness."
*(464) the blossoming of their daughters: The verb stem here is
ziih, "to flower" (X.), and fits with an earlier floral metaphor for
young women [see note *(415)].

Page 189 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(465) ate their corn: The verb here is uech, which refers
specifically to the eating of foods made of corn, and what I have
translated "corn" is ua, which refers to these same things,
primarily to tamales (which are often made of nothing but corn dough
in Guatemala).
*(466) our way of being thankful and grateful: The former is
camouabal [4amouabal], "thanks-instrument," and the latter is pacubal,
translated on the basis of pa3uh, "be thankful for" (B.).
*(467) allied tribes ... principalities: See note *(352) for a
discussion of these terms.
*(468) The Lords Cotuha and Plumed Serpent: The Cotuha mentioned
here is probably not the one who ruled as Keeper of the Mat at Bearded
Place, but the Cotuha who was Keeper of the Reception House Mat when
Plumed Serpent was Keeper of the Mat.
*(469) There had been five changes and five generations: This is
xroquexoc xrolea puch, in which x- is complete, ro- is "five," and
puch is "and." The rest is translated on the basis of quexoc, "change,
return," and le, "generation" (both in B.).
*(470) their separation, when they quarreled among themselves,
disturbing the bones and skulls of the dead: The scribe got into a
tangle here, writing as follows (the items in parentheses were written
in the margin with their places of insertion marked by daggers):
quihachouic quib ta xqui (tzolbeh quib) tzol (cacbeh) bac uholom
caminac xquicacbeh quib. The only way I can make sense of this is to
assume that the scribe meant to cross out the final xquicacbeh quib
and move it (except for xqui-) to a position immediately following the
dangling xqui he had already written, and to insert a missing beh
after tzol. In the process he unnecessarily repeated tzol before
-beh and then inverted the order of cacbeh and tzolbeh, meanwhile
forgetting to cross out the final xquicacbeh quib. If I am right,
the text should read, quihachouic quib ta xquicacbeh [xquicakbeh] quib
tzolbeh bac [bak] uholom caminac [caminak], "their-sorting-out
themselves when they-quarreled themselves turning-over bone its-head
dead-person."
*(471) the lord bishop: This is Sr. obicpo, the first Spanish to
appear in the text since Part One. The person referred to here is
Francisco Marroquin, who blessed the ruins of Rotten Cane in 1539,
fifteen years after the place had been burned by Alvarado.
*(472) And now to show their faces: This is cate [4ate] chic
chiuachin uuach, "next now that-show his-face," singular in Quiche
in order to agree with "each of them" in the previous sentence. The
notion of "face" is intimately tied up with personal identity in
Quiche; a person's day of birth, for example, is called uuach u3ih,
"its-face his/her-day," and a number of Quiche lords were named
after the days of their birth. A later passage mentioning the
"faces" of lords precedes a list of the names of individual lords. I
have put dots following both of these mentions of faces to indicate
that graphic elements might be missing here, something that was in the
manuscript Ximenez discovered but which he did not reproduce. If

Page 190 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

that manuscript was like the Book of Chilam Balam of Mani, there may
have been a graphic device, at least partially based on hieroglyphic
writing, corresponding to each lord. In the Mani book the device is
a line drawing of a face with a European crown, a latter-day version
of the much more stylized face that composes the glyph meaning ahau or
"lord," but the individual name of each lord is written in block
letters on a scroll beneath the head rather than rendered
hieroglyphically (Eugene R. Craine and Reginald C. Reindorp, The Codex
Perez and the Chilam Balam of Mani, pp. 79-86).
*(473) a crowded life, crowded with petitions: "Crowded"
translates molomox, a passive form of molomanic, "many join
together" (B.). "Petitions" translates utabal tzih, in which the
stem of utabal is taba, "supplicate" (B.), and tzih is "words."
*(474) The birthdays: This is uquih [u3ih] ralaxic, "its-day
his-being-born," the phrase still used for "birthday."
*(475) On one occasion: This is hu uuc, a phrase most translators
have taken to be hu uuk and to mean "one seven" (literally) and "seven
days" (idiomatically). But "seven" should be uukub, not uuk, and there
is nothing in the colonial dictionaries of Quichean languages that
would allow for its combination with hu. The solution I offer is based
on considerations of context and on uu3ul, a form that refers to
pauses or interruptions in the normal course of events (V.); I take
the present phrase to be hu uu3 and to mean something like "during one
interval," or (idiomatically) "one time" or "on one occasion."
*(476) serpentine.... aquiline ... feline: At some moments this
passage claims that Plumed Serpent became an "actual" (quitzih)
serpent (cumatz) or eagle (cot) or jaguar (balam), but at other
moments it would seem that he took on the qualities of these
animals. Wherever I translate with English words ending in -ine, the
MS. has cumatzil, cotal, and balamil, each of which has a suffix
meaning something like "-ness."
*(477) The news spread: This is xpaxin rib utaic, "it-scattered
itself its-being-heard."
*(478) he became the sole head: "Sole" here is huquizic,
translated on the basis of hu4izic, "only" (V.).
*(479) went down on their faces or flat on their backs: This is
xuleic, xpacaic, translated on the basis of xuleic, "throw face
down" (B.), and pa4alic, "face up" (X.).
*(480) Their lineages came to be bled, shot full of arrows at the
stake: This is xeoc chinamit xelotzic xecacquic chiche [chichee], in
which xeoc is literally "they-entered" but idiomatically "it was their
time," and chichee is "at-tree" or "at-pole." Xelotzic, in which xeis "complete-they," is translated on the basis of lotzo, "to let
blood" (B. and V.). Xecacquic (with a passive suffix) is translated
"they were shot with arrows" by Ximenez; B. has cacoqueh (with an
active suffix), "hunt with arrows." This passage confirms that
Quiche rituals included arrow sacrifice, a practice better known
from central Mexico.
*(481) Projectiles alone were the means for breaking the citadels:

Page 191 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

The weapon here is 4ha [sometimes 4hab] in the MS., "arrow" and
(judging from V.) the spear thrown by an atlatl (spear-thrower). 4ha
or 4hab is distinct from cha or chaa, which is the term for any lithic
projectile point or cutting instrument and (today) for glass (see
4ha and chaa in V., chab and cha in B., and 4hab and cha in X.). In
Mixtec codices, towns (or citadels) are identified by place signs
whose basic element is a mountain; the conquest of a town is signified
by showing its place sign pierced with a projectile (Mary Elizabeth
Smith, Picture Writing from Ancient Southern Mexico, p. 33 and fig.
51). The present passage sounds like a literal reading of a codex of
this style. It may also be that such codices depict a ritual
practice in which the very earth or native stone of a conquered
citadel was actually pierced or broken. Whatever the case with
codices, people from the towns conquered by the Quiche came to
Petatayub, "carrying in their hands the signs of the citadels,"
which "look as though they had been split with an axe."
*(482) one ... after another: This is libah chi, given by B. as
"step by step."
*(483) the gum tree: I follow Edmonson in reading col che as 3ol
chee, "gum (or resin) tree" (The Book of Counsel, p. 236), rather than
as a place named "Colche," partly because the name of the place
under discussion in this passage is otherwise accounted for.
*(484) carrying in their hands: This is chelah, translated on the
basis of 4helenic, "to carry with the hands" (X.).
*(485) cut stones: I have supplied "stones" here, assuming that they
are still the subject of the discussion; "cut" is my translation of
xcatatahic [x3atatahic], "complete-cut-result-passive." Reading the
verb stem as 3ata, "cut," fits with xchoi chi icah, "split with an
axe," later on in this same sentence, and with the general sense of
the paragraph up to this point.
*(486) there on the flat: Ximenez translates tacah [ta3ah] as "the
coast," meaning the long Pacific coastal plain of Guatemala, but
this term can refer even to very small flats. See Petatayub in the
Glossary for a further discussion.
*(487) "and like doubles for our own lineages": This is quehe pu
cacachinamit, which I read as quehe pu kacacab chinamit, "like and
our-pair lineages."
*(488) "send for us to come and kill them": Here the text has both
nu, the first person singular, and ca [ka], first person plural. The
text reads chulibiih chibe nu ca camizah, in which ca is written
somewhat above the line, just after nu; for this reason, and because
the statement quoted here is attributed to three people, I take nu
to be an error the scribe forgot to cross out when he added ca.
*(489) nor did any of them have his own god: That is to say, those
who were sent to occupy the conquered citadels did not have stone gods
(4abauil) of the kind that were brought from Tulan Zuyua. We do not
know whether the previous lords of these citadels had such stones or
what might have been the fate of their stones. It is interesting to
note that the present-day term 4amauil, which covers large stones

Page 192 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

found in outdoor shrines, is used only in the region around the
ruins of Rotten Cane. Shrines in the western Quiche area lack such
stones, and the small stone objects collected for household altars are
called by a different term, mebil.
*(490) "the ennobling of the lookout lineages": The "ennobling" is
quecalem [quekalem], in which qu- is "their"; B. gives ecalem as
"dignity" or "nobility." The root eka- has to do with taking a load on
the shoulders; it is used today in various expressions having to do
with the taking on of responsibilities, such as those of
mother-fathers for people they train as daykeepers, or those of
daykeepers for the clients they are currently praying for.
*(491) "we'll induct": This is cachapa [kachapa], literally
"we-take-hold-of," but V. notes that chapa is also an idiom for
"putting into lordship."
*(492) "which is mine ... which is yours": This translates ue, "of
mine," and aue, "of yours (singular familiar)"; others have missed the
sense of this sentence, trying to make these two pronouns agree;
Edmonson has ui for the ue of the MS. (The Book of Counsel, p. 240).
*(493) in concord: This is hunam uach, literally "equal face," an
idiom meaning "to be in concord" (under the entry for hun in B.).
*(494) a fortress around Quiche: In effect, the entire Quiche
state was conceived as a gigantic fortress, an enlargement of the
citadel at its center.
*(495) house of sacrifice: This is cahbaha, which I take to be
composed of cahb, "sacrifice" [see the note *(351)], and ha,
"house." Some have taken cahbaha to be a reference to the place called
Sajcabaja today, but that is written zacabaha or zaccabaha in the P.V.
(see Plaster House in the Glossary) and combines ha with zakcaba,
"plaster."
*(496) they nurtured and provided for the Keeper of the Mat and
Keeper of the Reception House Mat: The gods are spoken of at various
points as needing nurturers and providers; the present passage means
that the relationship between lords and vassals was conceived in the
same terms as that between gods and humans. Note here that the text
goes right on to emphasize the greatness of the lords under
discussion.
*(497) everything they saw was clear to them: That is to say, they
were able to recover the clairvoyance that the first humans had before
"they were blinded as the face of a mirror is breathed upon."
*(498) there was a place to see it, there was a book: The "place
to see it" is ibal re, earlier written as ilbal re. With the book
the lords are able to recover the full vision of the first humans;
such vision, as this passage makes clear, reached into future time.
*(499) a way of cherishing: This is locbal [lo3bal], "love (or
desire or value) instrument." Andres Xiloj suggested "something that
shows esteem or expresses a sense of value."
*(500) For nine score days they would fast: "Nine score" is beleh
uinac [uinak]; Edmonson is correct in reading this as 9 x 20 rather
than "nine persons" (The Book of Counsel, p. 243). As he has observed,

Page 193 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

180 is half a tun, the 360-day cycle (distinct from the solar year)
used by the lowland Maya in reckoning chronologies. The "thirteen
score" (or 260) mentioned next is the length of the so-called
divinatory cycle, while the "seventeen score" (or 340) is the combined
length of the 90- and 250-day segments of the Venus cycle (see the
notes to the Introduction).
*(501) They would only eat zapotes, matasanos....: For
identifications of the tropical fruits listed here, see the
Glossary. Of this kind of diet, Andres Xiloj said, "This was so that
they would have strength. This Tecum Umam [hero of Quiche resistance
to the Spanish] didn't eat cooked things, only raw [or green]
things. Because of this, the people of that time were muscular.
Whatever place they went, whatever kind of fruit they found, they
ate in place of tamales."
*(502) abstinence: This is auazinic, translated on the basis of
auazim, "forbidden" (in B. under auatz).
*(503) there weren't any women with them when they slept: This
does not mean that women were not present at all. When people "keep
the days" at present, the abstinence always includes sexual contact
but never avoidance of all interaction with the opposite sex. If the
fasts described here were like those of the first four Quiche
ancestors, it was not only the lords who fasted but their wives as
well.
*(504) "On this blessed day": This is atoob uquih [u3ih], in which
u3ih is "its-day"; B. gives atob as "good."
*(505) "ripeness and freshness": literally 3anal, "yellowness,"
and raxal, "greenness." Andres Xiloj commented: "When one prays, 3anal
means to have corn, to have money, to do business. Yes, it is like
'yellow' but it isn't yellow, but rather that it ripens. Raxal is like
a plant that is green, it is developing to give fruit. 3anal is when
it ripens."
*(506) "spread thy stain, spill thy drops / of green and yellow":
This is a fairly literal translation of chatziloh, chamaquih uloc
[cha4,iloh, chama4ih ulok] araxal, a3anal. Andres Xiloj commented:
"4,iloh is to use [sexually]; now they are going to have a family.
Ma4ih is the sin. The man looks for his companion, there it is. And
there is that liquid [semen]. And the green [raxal], there it is, it
is the son or daughter, and the yellow [3anal]; and they, in turn,
have to produce again. Here it is like a plant, the sowing of a plant,
and its ripening."
*(507) "that they might multiply" [chipo3tah]: Andres Xiloj
commented: "Po3tah is that it produces. Like a seed: when we cast
it, we say to it, capo3 la, 'Come out [sprout], produce more.'"
Commenting on the prayer as a whole, he said, "We're using this now;
it's just that the language has changed somewhat."
*(508) "may they neither be snared nor wounded, / nor seduced, nor
burned, / nor diverted below the road nor above it": "Burned" is
paired with "seduced" here because, as Andres Xiloj pointed out, the
act of seducing an innocent person may be expressed in the phrase

Page 194 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

xuporo rakan, "He (or she) burned her (or his) legs." He suggested
that a contemporary prayer for safety in the road might include the
following lines:
Do not let us fall into the hands
of this person, this neighbor,
who has a pistol, who has a dagger,
who has a knife, who has a revolver;
keep away the legs and arms
of people at the corners, on the streets.
Contemporary prayers also include numerous passages with lists of
negative requests; here is an example from a prayer by Esteban
Ajxub, a professional ahbix or "singer":
May there be no pain,
may there be no trouble,
may there be no jail,
may there be no prison,
may there be no weakness,
may there be no feebleness,
may there be no stiffness,
may there be no lies and gossip.
*(509) "secrets or sorcery of thine": This is acuil auitzmal, in
which a- is your (singular familiar)." Andres Xiloj read cuil as
4uyil, "hidden"; itzmal is translated on the basis of itzim, "witched"
(X.). Don Andres commented, "God gives all the good and all the evil."
*(510) "before thy mouth and thy face": Placement "before" someone's
"face" is the commonest Quiche way of saying something like English
"in" someone's "presence"; sometimes this is elaborated, as here, by
adding "mouth" to "face," in which, if "face" is a metonym for the
whole front of the body, "mouth" is a metonym for the whole face. In
the present context "mouth" has an additional connotation, given
that it refers in part to Heart of Earth, the deity called Mundo
today. This is the great Mesoamerican earth deity, the ultimate
swallower of all living things, depicted in classic Maya art (in the
Palenque relief panels, for example) as an enormous pair of jaws
upon whose lips even the feet of great lords must rest in precarious
balance, and into whose throat even great lords must fall. Turning
to the contemporary scene, daykeepers who visit the cave beneath the
ruins of Rotten Cane, the last Quiche capital, speak of the danger
of falling into "the open mouth of the Mundo" there, which is said
to be more than four yards wide.
*(511) carrying the tribes and all the Quiche people on their
shoulders: This is re3alaxic [rekalaxic] amac [ama3] ru4 ronohel
queche uinac [uinak], "its-being-carried (on the shoulders) tribe,
with all-of Quiche people."
*(512) they became lords: The verb stem here is ahauaric, "to make
oneself a lord" (B.).
*(513) gathered in gifts: This is xquicac cochih, in which xquiis "complete-they"; the rest is translated on the basis of 4a4, "to
gather" (E.), and cochih, "to receive a gift." (B.).

Page 195 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

*(514) food and drink: This is uain ucaha, translated on the basis
of the reading offered by Andres Xiloj, who uses the phrase uaim
o4aha, "food, drink," in his own prayers.
*(515) falsify: This is tzuba, translated on the basis of tzubu,
"deceive" (B.).
*(516) drops ... that measured the width of four fingers or a full
fist across: "Drops" is my translation of racan [rakan], literally
"its leg" but also a term for the large drops of rain that begin or
end a thunderstorm (see Hurricane in the Glossary). The measurements
are cahcab [cah3ab], translated on the basis of cah3a, "measured
with the four fingers together" (under 3a in V.), and tuic, translated
on the basis of tuuic, "measurement of the fist with the thumb out"
(B.).
*(517) green and red featherwork: This is raxon cubulchactic. Raxon,
literally "greened," is a synonym for 3u3, "quetzal feather."
Cubulchactic is a "thing made of feathers" (G.) or a "garland" (R.);
B. lists chactic as "a species of red bird."
*(518) rise and growth: The MS. has unimaric ri unimaric puch, in
which the second unimaric is probably an error for uuinakiric,
giving "its-big-becoming its-growth and."
*(519) two by two: In the list of Cauec lords that follows, the
pairing of lords will not actually begin until the fourth generation.
*(520) succeeds: This is camiheic, which Ximenez translates this
way; B. has 4amibeh, "continue" (listed after camibeh).
*(521) the faces ... of each of the Quiche lords: Again, it would
seem that something is missing here; perhaps the MS. Ximenez copied
had name glyphs for the lords in the list that follows this statement.
*(522) Great Reception House: The MS. repeats this title after
Mother of the Reception House and leaves out Great Lolmet Yeoltux, the
final name on an earlier list of titles belonging to the Greathouses.
*(523) great in being few: This is nim zcaquin u4oheic, "great few
(or little bit) its-being-there."
*(524) the original book and ancient writing: This is simply nabe
oher, "original (or first) ancient" in the MS., abbreviated from a
phrase near the opening of the P.V., nabe uuhil, oher tzibam
[4,ibam] puch, translated as "the original book and ancient
writing." I have repeated the full phrase here to make the echo of the
opening more obvious. In general the closing paragraph is rather
terse, as if the hand that wrote it were running downhill toward the
finish.
GLOSSARY
GLOSSARY
ABOVE THE HOT SPRINGS Chuui miquina [mi3inaa], "above (or on top
of) hot water." The town known today as San Miguel Totonicapan,
capital of the Department of Totonicapan, formerly located on one of
the hilltops above the present site. Once a citadel of the White
Earths (Mam Mayas), conquered by the Quiche lords during the reign
of Quicab. Today the inhabitants speak Quiche.

Page 196 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

ABOVE THE NETTLES Chuui la, "above (or on top of) the nettles." The
town more widely known today as Chichicastenango, a Nahua name meaning
"Nettles Citadel." Formerly a Cakchiquel citadel, conquered by the
Quiche lords during the reign of Quicab. Today the inhabitants speak
Quiche.
ACUL PEOPLE Acul uinac [uinak], in which uinak is "people." A
people belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes the Quiches
regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east.
ANCIENT WORD Oher tzih, also translatable as "Prior Word." A
word, whether in the narrow sense of a single word or in the broad
sense of an extended discourse, that carries the authority of
tradition rather than being mere hearsay. At the beginning the writers
of the P.V. claim this authority for their entire work, though they
occasionally assign their later statements to hearsay.
ANONAS Cauex [3auex]. A tropical fruit (Anona spp.), sometimes
called "cherimoya" or "custard apple" in English. Heart-shaped,
green outside and creamy inside, segmented, and incredibly sweet.
ARMADILLO Yboy. The name of a dance done by Hunahpu and Xbalanque
in their guise as vagabonds.
ARMADILLO DUNG Achac [achak] iboy, "dung armadillo." Crier to the
People for the Lord Quiches when Quicab was Keeper of the Mat;
possibly a nickname for one of the Lord Quiche lords listed in Part
Five of the present translation.
ARM GUARD Pachcab [pa4h3ab], composed of pa4h, "tighten, fasten"
(X.), and 3ab, "arm." Part of the equipment necessary for the ball
game played in the P.V. (see gaming equipment). The players of the
pre-Columbian ball game are usually depicted with a wrapping on the
lower arm (often the right arm only).
ATOLE A ixim, "water corn-kernel," is the Quiche term for the
corn-gruel drink more widely known in Mesoamerica by its Nahua name,
atole.
AUILIX Often aulix in the MS. Patron deity of the Greathouse
lineage, given to Jaguar Night at Tulan Zuyua and eventually placed in
Concealment Canyon, "the great canyon in the forest", in a location
that came to be named Pauilix, literally "At Auilix"; the
Greathouses were there when the dawn first came. Auilix was also the
name of the temple that housed the god Auilix in the citadel of Rotten
Cane, at the east side of the main plaza. It consisted of a pyramid
with a single stairway (on the west side) and topped by a single
thatch-roofed room with its door facing west across the plaza,
toward the temple that housed the god Tohil; at present its ruins
are the site of an active shrine. And finally, Auilix or Lord Auilix
was the title of the priest of the god Auilix; he was seventh in
rank among the lords of the Greathouses and headed one of the nine
great houses into which their lineage was divided after the founding
of Rotten Cane.
BALL COURT Hom. The I-shaped courtyard in which the Mesoamerican
ball game was played. The playing field was paved with stone and
bounded by stone walls; the side walls of the narrow part

Page 197 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

(connecting the two ends of the I) sloped upward in opposite
directions from the playing surface, resembling grandstands in
appearance but in fact constituting part of the area where the ball
was in play. The ball court at Rotten Cane (see Councilor of the
Ball Court) ran east-west, but many Mesoamerican ball courts ran
north-south. Today hom is the Quiche term for "graveyard," which
suggests the deadly nature of the game described in the P.V., at least
when it is played in the underworld court of the lords of Xibalba (see
also Place of Ball Game Sacrifice). It should be noted that the
playing fields of the ball courts in Mesoamerican archaeological sites
typically lie on a lower plane than that of the nearby plazas or
courtyards.
BARK HOUSE See Thorny Place.
BAT HOUSE Zotzi [zo4,i] ha. One of the tests of Xibalba, fourth
or sixth in the sequence of tests. If the test of fire that comes
fifth in the later list is discounted as a redundant elaboration based
on the eventual immolation of Hunahpu and Xbalanque (which does not
take place in a house), then Bat House would come fifth in the later
sequence and both sequences would total five houses. These houses
may correspond to the five different kinds of complete Venus cycles
plotted out in the Maya calendar; each cycle includes a ninety-day
period during which Venus has disappeared as the morning star and
has not yet reappeared as the evening star. Bat House is also the name
of a lordly Cakchiquel lineage whose founders steal fire from the
Quiches rather than pledge themselves as sacrifice victims.
BEARDED PLACE Chi izmachi, "at bearded." Citadel of the Quiche
lords after they left Thorny Place and before they built Rotten
Cane, founded by Jaguar Conache. When the Cauecs, Greathouses, and
Lord Quiches left for Rotten Cane, Bearded Place was left to the Tams.
The ruins are located one kilometer south of Rotten Cane, separated
from the latter by a canyon.
BEARER, BEGETTER Alom 4aholom, "one who bears children, one who
begets sons," sometimes pluralized (e alom, e 4aholom). Names or
epithets for the gods who make the earth, plants, animals, and humans.
The bearing and begetting is metaphorical, since these gods do their
work by means of words, genius, and sacrifice rather than through
procreation. The same gods are also called Maker, Modeler, and they
include Sovereign Plumed Serpent.
BEFORE THE BUILDING Chuua tzac [4,ak], "in-front-of building (of
earth or stone)." The town more widely known today as Momostenango,
a Nahua name meaning "Citadel of Shrines," formerly located five
kilometers northwest of its present site. Conquered by the Quiche
lords during the reign of Quicab.
BIRD HOUSE Tziquina [4,iquina] ha. The palace, at Rotten Cane, of
the Keeper of the Reception House Mat, second in rank among all the
Quiche lords. Not to be confused with the ah4,iquina ha, "those of the
Bird House," a people known today as the Tzutuhil. They speak a
language of the Quichean family and are located south and west of Lake
Atitlan. They belong to a group of thirteen allied tribes the

Page 198 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Quiches regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east.
BLACK ROAD Quecabe [3ekabe]. One of four cosmic roads (see
Crossroads and Road of Xibalba).
"BLAME IS OURS, THE" Camacu [kamacu], "our blame or wrong." A
song sung by Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True
Jaguar, in which they lamented being separated from the other
peoples who were together at Tulan Zuyua before the first dawn. They
especially lamented leaving the Yaqui people behind, presumably
Nahua speakers of the Gulf coast.
BLOOD GATHERER Cuchuma quic [qui4], "gathering (or uniting) blood."
Fourth-ranking lord of Xibalba; by this same name he figures in
present-day Quiche tales, in which he heads the banquet table where
the other lords of Xibalba bring together all human blood that has
been lost by violence or illness since their previous banquet.
BLOOD RIVER Quia or quiquia [qui4 yaa], "blood water." A river that
crosses the road to Xibalba (the underworld). This name, along with
Pus River, might have been an actual toponym, referring to a large,
muddy river of the kind that originates in the Guatemalan highlands
and flows into the northern lowlands. For today's Quiche the region
that drops off toward the Atlantic in the vicinity of Coban is still
an abode of evil.
BLOOD WOMAN Xquic [xqui4], composed of x-, archaic in Quiche but
"she of" or "small" in Cholan (K.), and qui4, "blood"; by way of sound
play the name also suggests i4, "moon." Daughter of Blood Gatherer,
one of the lords of Xibalba, and mother of Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
She is probably the moon but perhaps not the full moon (see
Xbalanque).
BLOODY TEETH, BLOODY CLAWS Quic [qui4] re, quic rixcac [rix4ak],
"blood his teeth, blood his claws." These two lords of Xibalba are
omitted from earlier lists but appear as the eleventh- and
twelfth-ranking lords in later lists. The situation is just the
opposite for Trash Master and Stab Master, who appear only in the
earlier lists and may be these same two lords under different names.
BONE FLUTE, BIRD WHISTLE Zubac [zubak], in which zu is "flute"
and bak is "bone," and chamcham, possibly a reduplicated form
derived from 4hanin, referring to the trilling and warbling of birds
(V.). Among the emblems of lordship given out by Nacxit.
BONE SCEPTER, SKULL SCEPTER 4hamia bac [bak], 4hamia holom,
"staff bone, staff skull (or head)." Seventh- and eighth-ranking lords
of Xibalba.
BRACELET OF RATTLING SNAIL SHELLS Macutax tot tatam, in which
macutax is probably from Nahua mahcuetlax, "bracelet" (C.); tot is
"snail"; and tatam may be related to totaanic, "shake" (X.). One of
the emblems of lordship given out by Nacxit.
BROKEN PLACE, BITTER WATER PLACE Pan paxil, pan cayala [cayalaa],
in which pan is an archaic or non-Quiche form of pa, "at" or "in";
paxil probably has the same root as paxinic, "to break" (used with
pottery); and cayal may be like modern 4ayil, "bitter," combined
with -aa for "water." A mountain or citadel where the Makers and

Page 199 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Modelers got the corn and water needed to make the bodies of the first
true humans; its interior was filled not only with corn but with a
variety of tropical fruits. The name Broken Place suggests the Nahua
myth in which a mountain containing the corn needed for human flesh
was split open by a thunderbolt.
BROMELIAS Ec [e4]. Tillandsia spp., air plants abounding in the
trees of highland Guatemala, except in arid regions. In some species
the flowers have pointed petals and grow at the ends of stiff stalks
that jut out from the rest of the plant; hence their use by Hunahpu
and Xbalanque in constructing the arms and claws of an artificial
crab. Today, bromelias and Spanish moss are among the principal
materials used in constructing outdoor arbors for saints.
BUNDLE OF FLAMES Pizom 3a3al, "wrapped fieriness or heat." A sacred
relic left to the Quiche lords by Jaguar Quitze. Like the sacred
bundles of the North American Indians, a sort of cloth-wrapped ark
with mysterious contents.
CACAO Caco. Theobroma cacao, a higher grade of cacao than
pataxte. The seeds of cacao, which is native to the New World, were
and are used by Mesoamerican Indians to make cocoa and chocolate.
CAKCHIQUELS 3a3chequeleb or ca3chiqueleb, in which che is from
chee, "tree"; the first syllable would be "fire" (3a3), judging by the
spelling in the P.V., but in the etymology offered by the Annals of
the Cakchiquels it is cak, "red." This is the name (still used
today) of a people who border the Quiches on the south and east;
they speak a language of the Quichean family. They belong to a group
of thirteen allied tribes the Quiches regarded as having come (like
themselves) from the east. One of the Cakchiquel citadels, Above the
Nettles, was conquered by the Quiche lords during the reign of Quicab.
CALABASH TREE Zima [tzimah]; tzimah is Cholan for "gourd" (K.), but
in Quiche this is a term for a lowland tree with fruit resembling
gourds (Crescentia cujete). It did not bear fruit until the head of
One Hunahpu was placed in a fork of its branches. According to
Andres Xiloj, the "gourds" of this tree are indeed the size of a human
head; they have a woody or bonelike rind and are halved to make bowls.
CALM SNAKE Chamalcan, in which chamal may be derived from chaman,
"calm" (V.), and can is Yucatec for "snake." That the writers of the
P.V. were aware of the meaning of can is hinted at by the fact that
they comment, after mentioning the name chamalcan, "but it looks
like a bat." The name of the god of the Bat House lineage of the
Cakchiquels.
CANOPY, THRONE Muh, "canopy" (literally "shade"), and 3alibal,
"presiding chair" (G.). Among the emblems of lordship given out by
Nacxit. The Keeper of the Mat was entitled to have four canopies
over him, the Keeper of the Reception House Mat three, the Lord
Minister two, and the Crier to the People one.
CAOQUES Caoqueb, an untranslatable proper name with a plural suffix
(-b). A tribe whose citadels once included Plaster House, which was
among the places conquered by the Quiche lords during the reign of
Quicab. Possibly the Caoques are the ancestors of the people who speak

Page 200 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

the Quichean language called Uspantec today and whose present
territory begins only ten kilometers north of Plaster House.
CAUATEPECH A Nahua name of uncertain translation. Keeper of the
Reception House Mat in the eleventh generation of Cauec lords.
CAUECS Cauiquib [cauikib], singular cauec [cauek]. First-ranking
Quiche lineage, founded by Jaguar Quitze and divided into nine
segments or great houses after the founding of Rotten Cane.
CAUINAL See Thorny Place.
CAUIZIMAH Keeper of the Reception House Mat in the seventh
generation of Cauec lords.
CAUIZTAN COPAL Cauiztan pom, in which pom is "copal incense" and
the rest is a Nahua name of uncertain translation. The kind of copal
used by Jaguar Night to incense the direction of the rising sun.
CAVE BY THE WATER Pecul ya; V. gives rupecul as "cave at the edge
of a river or lake," and ya is "water." One of the volcanoes made by
Zipacna. It may be the Volcan de Agua, eleven kilometers south of
Antigua Guatemala, which once had a lake at its summit.
CELEBRATED SEAHOUSE Caha [3aha] paluna, from 3ahar, "be famous";
palu, an archaic or non-Quiche form of plo or palo, "sea"; and na,
Yucatec for "house." One of the first four human females; wife of
Jaguar Quitze.
CHANNEL CATFISH Uinac [uinak] car, "person fish," identified by
G. as the bagre or channel catfish. One of the forms assumed by
Hunahpu and Xbalanque. Catfish barbels are shown coming out of the
cheeks of the classic Maya equivalent of Hunahpu.
CHIMALMAT A Nahua-derived name in which chimal is from chimalli,
"shield." The word chimalli also entered Yucatec; M. gives chimal as
"shield" and chimal ek ("shield stars") as "the guards of the north
(Ursa Minor)," but the constellation in question might well have
included Draco (to form the border of the shield). Chimalmat is the
wife of Seven Macaw and the mother of Zipacna and Earthquake. Her
astronomical identification fits with Seven Macaw's (he is the Big
Dipper).
CHULIMAL A place three kilometers north of Chichicastenango,
occupied by vassals of the Quiche lords during the reign of Quicab.
CHURNING SPIKES, RIVER OF Halha ha [haa] zimah; B. has halha ha
as "waters that join and revolve"; zimah is "sharpened or pointed
things." One of the rivers that crosses the road to Xibalba (the
underworld).
CITADEL Tinamit, from Nahua tenamitl, "enclosure, or wall of a
city" (D.). A town in a defensible position, whether on top of a
hill or mountain or between two canyons; any points of easy access
were walled or stockaded. Under Spanish rule most such towns were
relocated to weaker sites as a matter of colonial military policy;
today tinamit (or tinimit) is the general Quiche term for "town,"
regardless of location.
CO- 4o- or co- in the MS., probably related to the co- in two forms
given in B.: cobic, "to have an epithet," and cobizah, "to praise."
Co- begins the names of a large number of Quiche lords (see below),

Page 201 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

especially the earlier ones, and probably has an honorific effect.
COACUL First-ranking lord in the second generation of Greathouse
lords.
COACUTEC Second-ranking lord in the second generation of Greathouse
lords. He represented the Greathouses on the pilgrimage to the lord
Nacxit.
COAHAU Co-, an honorific prefix, with ahau, "lord." First-ranking
lord in the second generation of Lord Quiche lords. He represented the
Lord Quiches on the pilgrimage to the lord Nacxit.
COATI Tziz. Nasua narica, an omnivorous, tree-dwelling,
raccoon-like mammal with a long, flexible nose and a long, erect tail,
ranging from southern Arizona to South America; confined to the
lowlands in Guatemala.
COCAIB Co-, an honorific prefix, with caib, "two." First-ranking
lord in the second generation of Cauec lords. He represented the
Cauecs on the pilgrimage to the lord Nacxit. According to the Title of
the Lords of Totonicapan, his generation was already the fourth one
(starting with Jaguar Quitze) rather than the second.
COCAMEL Crier to the People for the Lords in the seventh generation
of Lord Quiche lords.
COCAUIB Second-ranking lord in the second generation of Cauec lords
and brother of Cocaib. According to the Title of the Lords of
Totonicapan, the generation of these brothers was already the fourth
one (starting with Jaguar Quitze) rather than the second. While Cocaib
was on the pilgrimage to the Lord Nacxit, Cocauib fathered a child,
Jaguar Conache, with Cocaib's wife. On his return, Cocaib nevertheless
recognized Jaguar Conache as his own legitimate successor in the
first-ranking Cauec lordship.
COCHAHUH First-ranking lord in the third generation of Greathouse
lords.
COCHINEAL See croton.
COCOZOM Crier to the People for the Lords in the fourth
generation of Lord Quiche lords.
COHAH A people belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes the
Quiches regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east.
COLD HOUSE Teuh ha. One of the tests of Xibalba, also called
Rattling House; it is second or third in the sequence of test
houses. These houses may correspond to the periods when Venus is
invisible between its appearances as morning and evening star (see Bat
House).
COMAHCUN Crier to the People for the Lords in the fifth
generation of Lord Quiche lords.
CONACHE See Jaguar Conache.
CONCEALMENT CANYON Euabal ziuan, "hiding place (or place of putting
into shadow) canyon." A great canyon in a forest; location of Pauilix,
where Jaguar Night placed the god Auilix. After Jaguar Quitze had
placed the god Tohil on a mountain in this same vicinity,
Concealment Canyon received the epithet Tohil Medicine.
COPAL Pom, from proto-Mixe-Zoque (C.). The Quiche term for a type

Page 202 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

of incense widely used in Mesoamerica to this day, better known as
copal (from Nahua copalli). The basic ingredient is the resin from the
bark of the palo jiote tree (Hymenaea verrucosa).
CORAL TREE, CORAL SEEDS Tzite [4,ite]. A tree known in Spanish as
palo pito (Erythrina corallodenron), or its hard, red, beanlike seeds.
The seeds are used by Xpiyacoc and Xmucane in performing calendrical
divination for the gods who seek the proper materials for the human
body; the wood of the tree is then used in making an experimental male
figure.
CORNTASSEL HOUSE Tzutuha [4,utuha], composed of 4,utuh, "tassel
of the maize plant," and ha, "house." Temple of the patron deity of
the Zaquic lineage, who was probably called 4,utuh, at Rotten Cane
or perhaps at a site now known as El Resguardo, one kilometer to the
east. Lord Corntassel House was the title of the first-ranking lord of
the Zaquic lineage, who headed one of the two great houses into
which that lineage was divided; he must have been the priest of the
Corntassel god.
CORTES, DON JUAN Lord Keeper of the Reception House Mat in the
fourteenth generation of Cauec lords, alive when the P.V. was written.
His title was recognized by the Spanish, but he was unsuccessful in
his attempt to restore the full powers of the Cauec lords to don
Juan de Rojas (Keeper of the Mat) and himself, an effort that took him
all the way to Spain.
COTUHA Co-, an honorific prefix, probably with tuh, "sweatbath,"
and ha, "house." Keeper of the Mat in the fourth generation of Cauec
lords. There were two plots against his life, in the second of which
he was ambushed at his sweatbath, according to the Title of the
Lords of Totonicapan; the latter source does not make it clear whether
this second plot succeeded, but the P.V. implies that it did. A second
Cotuha was Keeper of the Reception House Mat in the fifth generation
of Cauec lords, helping Plumed Serpent to found Rotten Cane. Still
other Cotuhas served as Lord Minister in the fifth, eighth, and
eleventh generations of Greathouse lords.
COTZIBAHA Co-, an honorific prefix, probably with 4,iba, "write,
paint," and ha, "house." Second-ranking lord in the third generation
of Greathouse lords.
COUNCIL BOOK Popo uuh or popol uuh, in which pop is "mat," -ol
has the effect of "-ness," and uuh (or vuh) is "paper" or "book." In
classical Quiche, popol occurs in many phrases in which it has the
effect of "public" or "in common"; popoh, a verb built on the same
root, was "to hold a council" (V.), and the pronouncements of a
council were popol tzih, in which tzih is "word." Popol, literally
"matness," would be a metonymic reference to a council, referring to
the mat on which a council sat; at the very same time it could be a
metaphor for the way councils were structured, weaving diverse
interests together. Alternative readings of popol uuh would be "Common
Book" or "Council Paper."
COUNCILOR OF THE BALL COURT Popol uinac [uinak] pahom tzalatz,
"council person in-courtyard long-and-narrow"; the second time this

Page 203 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

title is mentioned the name Xcuxeba is added (untranslatable). Title
of the lord who was eighth in rank among the Cauecs and head of one of
the nine great houses into which their lineage was divided after the
founding of Rotten Cane. The ball court at Rotten Cane ran east-west
and was located immediately south of the Great Monument of Tohil, with
its east end forming part of the west side of the main plaza. The
north wall of the ruins of the ball court is at present the site of an
active shrine.
COUNCILOR OF THE STORES Popol uinac [uinak] chituy, "council person
at-stack"; in B., tuyuba is "put one thing on top of another." Title
of the lord who was sixth in rank among the Cauecs and head of one
of the nine great houses into which their lineage was divided after
the founding of Rotten Cane.
COYABACOH Crier to the People for the Lords in the eighth
generation of Lord Quiche lords.
CRIER TO THE PEOPLE Ahtzic uinac [ahtzi4 uinak], "person who [or
person whose occupation is] calling out to people"; G. gives ahzi4
as "crier" (in the sense of "town crier"), and tzi4 could be an
archaic form of zi4, "to call out." Crier to the People or Crier to
the People for the Lords was the title of the lord who ranked first
among the Lord Quiches and headed one of the four great houses into
which their lineage was divided after the founding of Rotten Cane.
He ranked fourth among the four lords who jointly ruled the Quiche
state from Rotten Cane, with the Keeper of the Mat, Keeper of the
Reception House Mat, and the Lord Minister above him. A title with a
slightly different wording, Lord Crier to the People, pertained to the
lord who ranked second among the Greathouses and headed one of the
nine great houses of that lineage.
CRISTOBAL, DON Lord Minister in the twelfth generation of
Greathouse lords, still in office by September of 1554.
CROSSROADS Cahib xalcat be, "four junction roads"; xalcat refers to
any joining or forking of roads, and cahib makes this junction a
"crossroads." There are two lists of the names of the four roads
that lead away from this junction. The earlier list has Red, Black,
White, and Yellow roads; it seems consonant (in terms of both sequence
and colors) with the lowland Maya color-directional scheme, in which
red is east, black west, white north, and yellow south. The later list
has Black, White, Red, and Green roads; this may be a separate
scheme for which the Milky Way (rather than the sun's path) is the
key. In the P.V. the Black Road is also the Road of Xibalba, which
corresponds to the cleft in the Milky Way. Whenever the cleft is
visible, the opposite end of the Milky Way is undivided where it
intersects the horizon; the undivided part is called White Road (see
below), which could explain why Black and White (rather than Red and
Black) are paired in the later list of roads. Since characters
corresponding to Venus (One and Seven Hunahpu and later Hunahpu and
Xbalanque) travel a path that intersects the Black Road, the
Crossroads would seem to be the point at which the cleft is crossed by
the zodiac. Note that both the Milky Way and the zodiac shift

Page 204 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

positions with respect to the horizon; we are not dealing so much with
a system of cardinal points fixed to the terrestrial plain as with a
complex system of navigation.
CROTON 3a3che [cakchee] or chuh 3a3che, "red tree" or "cochineal
red tree." A croton called sangre de dragon in Spanish (Croton
sanguifluus). Cochineal is a red dye made from scale insects that feed
on the prickly pear cactus; in the present context the Quiche word for
this dye is used simply as a color term. When the "cochineal red tree"
is cut open, the sap that flows looks like blood and dries in scabrous
nodules. A large nodule of this sap is passed off as the heart of
Blood Woman by the messengers of Xibalba, and the burning of such
nodules is established as an appropriate offering to the lords of
Xibalba.
CRUNCHING JAGUAR Cotzbalam [co4,balam], composed of co4,ih, "grind"
(V.), and balam, "jaguar." One of the monsters who ends the era of the
wooden people.
CULBA See Thorny Place.
CUT ROCK Xay (or xoy) abah, possibly composed of choy, "cut," and
abah, "rock." The town known today as Joyabaj, occupied by vassals
of the Quiche lords during the reign of Quicab.
CUTTING ANTS, CONQUERING ANTS Chai zanic, chequen [4hequen]
zanic; chai refers to cutting instruments made of stone. Ants summoned
by Hunahpu and Xbalanque to help them cut the flowers of Xibalba;
possibly two names for the same species. V. lists he chay as ants that
go in swarms; Andres Xiloj identified 4hequen zanic as very large
leaf-cutting ants seen only in the lowlands, called zampopo in
Guatemalan Spanish.
DARK HOUSE Que3uma [3ekuma] ha. One of the tests of Xibalba,
first in the sequence of test houses. These houses may correspond to
the periods when Venus is invisible between its appearances as morning
and evening star (see Bat House).
"DAWN OF LIFE, THE" Zac [zak] 4azlem, "light (or dawn) life." An
epithet for the P.V., referring to the period after the first light of
dawn and of the sun itself, as contrasted with the previous period,
which is referred to by the epithet, "Our Place in the Shadows." An
alternative reading of the present epithet would be "The Life in the
Light."
DAYBRINGER Icoquih [iko3ih in both T. and V.], composed of iko- (or
eko-), "to carry a burden," and 3ih, "sun" or "day." The morning star.
DAYKEEPER Ahquih [ah3ih], "keeper (or person of) day (or sun),"
referring to diviners who count the days of the 260-day calendar using
coral seeds (see above). The daykeepers in the P.V. are the husband
and wife Xpiyacoc and Xmucane.
DEER DANCE PLAZA Xahba quieh, "dance-place deer." A place six
kilometers northwest of Chichicastenango, occupied by vassals of the
Quiche lords during the reign of Quicab.
DRY PLACE See Thorny Place.
EARTHQUAKE Cabracan [cabrakan], "earthquake" in both classical
and modern Quiche. This name has been etymologized as cab-, "two,"

Page 205 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

-r-, "his," and -akan, "leg," but "two" is caib in classical Quiche
and Cakchiquel and takes the form cabi- as a prefix. The Cakchiquel
equivalent of this name, cabarakan, makes it even harder to read "two"
and instead suggests caba, "pile up a quantity of earth" (V.). In that
case -rakan, which can mean not only "leg" but "trunk" or "pillar,"
suggests that the body of cabarakan provides the pillar (or pillars)
that hold up the earth, and that earthquakes are caused by his
movements. Earthquake is the second son of Seven Macaw and the younger
brother of Zipacna. He gives his name to a place nine kilometers
southeast of Rotten Cane, occupied by vassals of the Quiche lords
during the reign of Quicab.
EIGHT CORDS Uahxaqui caam [uahxaquib 4aam]. Keeper of the Mat in
the tenth generation of Cauec lords.
EIGHTEEN Uaxalahuh. A place of unknown location, occupied by
vassals of the Quiche lords during the reign of Quicab.
EMBLEMS OF LORDSHIP Uuachinel rahauarem, "its-face-agentive
his-lord-inchoative-substantive." The symbols of Toltecan lordship
given by Nacxit to Cocaib, Coacutec, and Coahau, listed as bone flute,
bird whistle; bracelet of rattling snail shells; canopy, throne; gourd
of tobacco; head and hoof of deer; nosepiece; paint of powdered yellow
stone; parrot feathers, heron feathers; and puma's paw, jaguar's paw
(see also under each of these headings).
FALCON Uoc, a bird that probably resembles the laughing falcon
(uac) listed elsewhere. A divine name paired with Hunahpu in a prayer.
Uoc is also the term used for the bird that serves as a messenger
for Heart of Sky, flying over One and Seven Hunahpu, as well as One
Monkey and One Artisan, while they play ball, (translated as
"falcon"); uac is the term for the bird that later brings a message to
Hunahpu and Xbalanque at the same ball court. The two falcons may be
the planets Jupiter and Saturn; given that the uoc seems to be given
greater importance, he may be Jupiter, which is brighter than Saturn.
FIRE MOUTH Chicac [chi3a3], "mouth fire." One of the volcanoes made
by Zipacna. Generally thought to be the Volcan de Fuego, nineteen
kilometers southwest of Antigua Guatemala.
FISHKEEPERS Chah [4hah] car, "guard fish." A people, also known
as Sovereign Oloman, who stayed in the east when the Quiche
ancestors left, but who later participated in a plot against them
while they were settled in the citadel of Hacauitz.
FOUR HUNDRED BOYS Omuch [omu4h] 4aholab, "four-hundred boys (or
sons of a male)." The boys who attempt to kill Zipacna but are
killed by him instead, eventually becoming the Pleiades (see
Hundrath). They die while in a drunken stupor, just as the four
hundred rabbits of Nahua mythology do, and like those rabbits they
were probably the patron deities of an alcoholic beverage (see sweet
drink) and of drunkenness.
GAMING EQUIPMENT Etzabal [e4,abal], "play-instrument." The gear
used by One and Seven Hunahpu and by their sons, Hunahpu and
Xbalanque, in the Quiche version of the Mesoamerican ball game. The
items mentioned in the P.V. include a kilt, yoke, arm guard,

Page 206 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

panache, headband, and rubber ball (see also under each of these
headings).
GENEROUS WOMAN, HARVEST WOMAN, CACAO WOMAN, CORNMEAL
WOMAN Xtoh,
xcanil [x3anil], xcacau, ix pu tziya, in which the x- or ix is archaic
in Quiche but "she of" or "small" in Cholan (K.); toh may be related
(given the horticultural nature of the accompanying names) to
tohohohenic, "to give in abundance" (X.); 3anil is "yellow" or
"harvest"; cacau is "cacao"; and tziya is "corn flour." Apparently
these are all names or epithets for the single goddess who guards
the crops of One Monkey and One Artisan.
GENIUS Naual. From a Nahua term (usually written nagual)
referring to the animal alter ego of a person. In Quiche usage naual
is much broader, referring to the spiritual essence or character of
a person, animal, plant, stone, or geographical place; this
corresponds to English "genius" in its older sense as "spirit
familiar." In the P.V. naual is sometimes paired with puz, a word of
Mixe-Zoque and possibly Olmec origins (C.) that refers to the
cutting open of flesh with a knife and is the primary term for the act
of heart sacrifice. When used together, puz and naual are metonyms for
shamanic power, referring to the ability to make genius or spiritual
essence visible or audible by means of ritual.
GODLY COPAL Cabauil [4abauil] pom, "god copal." The kind of copal
incense used by Mahucutah to incense the direction of the rising sun.
GOUGER OF FACES Cotcouach [4ot4ouach], composed of 4ot4o, a
reduplicated form of 4oto, "to carve out," and uach, "face." One of
the monsters that ends the era of the wooden people. Andres Xiloj gave
the modern name as 4ot quiuach, "gouges out their faces," and
identified it as a kind of animal, commenting that "they still
exist, but I don't know whether in the sky or the forest. They stay in
the darkness, and when the sun doesn't shine they come out." In the
P.V. the Gouger of Faces accompanies a great, dark rainstorm.
GOURD OF TOBACCO 4uz buz, from Yucatec cuz or cutz, "tobacco,"
and bux, referring to a small gourd used for keeping tobacco (R.). One
of the emblems of lordship given out by Nacxit.
GRANARY Cuha, "granary for maize." The palace, at Rotten Cane, of
the Keeper of the Mat, first in rank among all the Quiche lords.
GRANDMOTHER OF DAY, GRANDMOTHER OF LIGHT Ratit quih [3ih], ratit
zac [zak], "its-grandmother day (or sun), its-grandmother light."
Epithets for Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, despite the fact that Xpiyacoc is
described in other contexts as a grandfather (mama). Andres Xiloj
explained that a grandmother of "day" and "light" would be a
grandmother from the beginning of light "until the end of the
world," that is, for as long as light lasts. In this context, then,
"day" and "light" are a dyadic and less direct way of referring to
what Indo-European languages reduce to the unitary concept of "time."
GREAT ABYSS AT CARCHAH Nim xob carchah or nim xol. If these two
forms both referred to the same place, and if xob were correct, then
the translation of nim xob would be "great respect (or shame)." But if

Page 207 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

xol were correct, then the translation would be something like
"great insertion"; xolobachan is given as "abyss" by B. Finally,
carchah suggests the town called San Pedro Carcha, located eight
kilometers east of Coban on a river that descends rapidly into a
canyon and thence to the lowlands. Nim xob carchah is the ball court
where One and Seven Hunahpu played (followed later by Hunahpu and
Xbalanque) before they were summoned by the lords of Xibalba. The
route from this ball court to Xibalba is described as descending
very steeply; perhaps it was poised at the edge of the "great
abyss." Nim xol (translated "Great Abyss" in Part Four of the
present translation) refers to a place located somewhere between
Staggering and Place of Advice on the Quiche route of migration.
Note that San Pedro Carcha is located far to the east of the area
presently inhabited by the Quiches- that is, in the direction from
which the P.V. says the Quiches came- and that One and Seven Hunahpu
are responsible for the morning star, which appears and disappears
in the east.
GREAT HOUSE Nim ha. A term for a formally organized and named
lineage segment (within a larger patrilineage) with a person of lordly
rank at its head, and for the palace that served as headquarters for
that segment (see also lineage).
GREATHOUSES Nihaib, composed of ni- from nima, "great"; ha or
hai, "house"; and -ib or -b, plural. Second-ranking Quiche lineage,
founded by Jaguar Night and divided into nine segments or great houses
after the founding of Rotten Cane.
GREAT LOLMET YEOLTUX See Lolmet.
GREAT MONUMENT OF TOHIL Nima tzac [4,ak] tohil, literally "great
building [specifically of stone or earth] Tohil." The temple that
housed the god Tohil in the citadel of Rotten Cane, on the west side
of the main plaza. It consisted of a pyramid with stairways on three
sides (all but the west) and topped by a single thatch-roofed room
with its door facing east across the plaza, toward the temple of
Auilix; at present its ruins are the site of an active shrine. It is
not clear whether the Great Monument of Tohil housed the original
Tohil stone brought from Tulan Zuyua by Jaguar Quitze or whether
that stone was left on the mountain of Patohil (see Tohil) and was
represented by some secondary object in Rotten Cane. In today's ritual
practice, one can use a shrine close at hand to summon up a deity
whose proper residence is another and quite distant shrine. The
diviners of El Palmar, a community whose inhabitants emigrated from
Momostenango, have named their local shrines after those of their
parent town but address the shrines of Momostenango itself from a
distance; they try to make a pilgrimage to the parent shrines once
each 260 days. In a like manner, the priest of Tohil at Rotten Cane
might have addressed the mountain named Patohil while he was
actually on the pyramid of Tohil, making periodic pilgrimages to the
mountain itself.
GREAT RECEPTION HOUSE Nima camha [4amha], "great receive-house."
Title of the lord who was fourth in rank among the Greathouses and

Page 208 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

head of one of the nine great houses into which their lineage was
divided after the founding of Rotten Cane.
GREAT TOASTMASTER Nim chocoh, "great convener of banquets." E.
gives choc- as "invite to a banquet"; G. and V. give chocola a similar
meaning, with V. specifying a banquet in which a drink prepared from
cacao was consumed. Each of the three ruling Quiche lineages had a
lord with this title, and each one of these lords was the head of
one of the great houses of his respective lineage. The Great
Toastmaster ranked third among the Cauec lords, sixth among the
Greathouses, and third among the Lord Quiches; these three Great
Toastmasters came together for meetings. They are described as being
like fathers and like "givers of birth" to the other lords, and as
being Mothers of the Word, Fathers of the Word (see below); they may
be the authors of the Popol Vuh. During the reign of Quicab the
title of Great Toastmaster was bestowed upon the heads of eleven
vassal lineages.
GREAT WHITE PECCARY, GREAT WHITE TAPIR Zaqui [zaki] nim ac [ak],
zaqui nima tziz, "white great peccary, white great tapir (or
coati)"; in abbreviated form, "Great White Peccary, Tapir" or "Great
Peccary, Great Tapir." These are epithets for Xpiyacoc and Xmucane,
respectively. That the ak is "great" and "white" identifies it as
the white-lipped peccary (Tayasu pecari), which has white jowls and is
markedly larger than the collared peccary (Tayasu tajacu); the
white-lipped peccary is strictly a lowland species, ak being the
Cholan term for the male (K.). That the tziz is "great" and "white"
identifies it as the tapir (Tapirella bairdii), which is enormously
larger than the coati and has white hair all over its jowls, cheeks,
and chest; no Quiche term for the tapir has been reported in
dictionary sources, but tzimin is "tapir" in Cholan (K.). Like the
white-lipped peccary, the tapir is a lowland species. What the coati
or tziz (see coati) and the tapir or tzimin have in common, in
addition to the first syllable of their names, is a very long and very
flexible snout. What the tapir and peccary have in common, in addition
to long, flexible snouts, is that they are ungulates.
GREEN ROAD Raxabe. In a prayer quoted in the P.V., the petitioner
asks for the Green Road and does not mention roads of any other
color (see also the "greening road" in a previous prayer). The Green
Road also appears in the later of two lists of the four cosmic
roads, where it replaces the Yellow Road mentioned earlier. In the
lowland Maya color scheme green did not correspond to any of the
four directions, but to the center, a sort of fifth direction. The
Green Road of the P.V. may be a paradoxical fifth road, synthesizing
the other four roads or passing vertically through the spot where they
cross. See also Crossroads.
GUARDIANS OF THE SPOILS Canchaheleb [can4haheleb], composed of canfrom canab, "spoils of war" (B.); 4hahel, "guardian"; and -eb, plural.
A people belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes the Quiches
regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east.
HACAUITZ Uitz is Cholan for "mountain" (K.) and the rest is of

Page 209 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

uncertain derivation. Patron deity of the Lord Quiche lineage, carried
by Mahucutah from Tulan Zuyua and eventually placed "above a great red
river" on a mountain that then took the name Hacauitz. The Lord
Quiches were there when the first dawn came, and the same mountain was
the site of the first Quiche citadel, built by Jaguar Quitze, Jaguar
Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar and abandoned after their deaths.
Hacauitz was also the name of the temple that housed the god
Hacauitz in the citadel of Rotten Cane, with its back marking the
south side of the main plaza. It consisted of a pyramid with a
single stairway (on the south side) and topped by a single
thatch-roofed room with its door facing south onto a courtyard
considerably smaller than the main plaza. Lord Hacauitz was the
title of the priest of the god Hacauitz; he was fourth in rank among
the lords of the Lord Quiches and headed one of the four great
houses into which their lineage was divided after the founding of
Rotten Cane.
HANGING MOSSES Atziyac [a4,iak], literally "clothing."
Dendropogon usneoides, an air plant commonly called Spanish moss in
English. See bromelias for a discussion of its use.
HEAD AND HOOF OF DEER Holom pich queh, "head (or skull) hoof deer."
Among the emblems of lordship given out by Nacxit.
HEADBAND Uach zot, in which uach is "face" and zot is "to make
circular, like a crown or ring" (V.). Part of the gear needed by
players of the ball game in the P.V. (see ball court and gaming
equipment), probably corresponding to the wreaths or turbans worn at
forehead level by the players in the ball-court reliefs of Chichen
Itza.
HEART OF SKY, HEART OF EARTH U4ux cah, u4ux uleu, "its-heart sky,
its-heart earth." Heart of Sky, sometimes followed by Heart of Earth
(which never appears by itself), is an epithet for the god or gods
otherwise named Hurricane, Newborn Thunderbolt, and Raw Thunderbolt.
These epithets are no longer used in Quiche prayers, but Andres
Xiloj compared the notion of u4ux uleu to that of u4ux puuak, "Heart
of Metal," which is applied to found objects that are either ancient
artifacts or stones that happen to resemble life forms. Some of
these objects (especially artifacts shaped by flaking) are said to
have been formed where lightning struck the ground, which suggests
that it was lightning that provided the conceptual link between the
Hearts of Sky and Earth for the Quiches of the P.V.
HEART OF THE LAKE, HEART OF THE SEA U4ux Cho, u4ux palo, "its-heart
lake, its-heart sea." These are epithets that may cover all the gods
who were in or on the sea before the raising of the earth; they are
also known as Maker, Modeler and as Bearer, Begetter, and they include
Sovereign Plumed Serpent. Their counterparts, with whom they cooperate
in making the earth, are covered by a contrasting pair of epithets:
Heart of Sky, Heart of Earth.
HOT SPRINGS See Above the Hot Springs.
HOUSE CORNER Xiquiri pat; in Pokomchi Maya (a language of the
Quichean family), xiquin pat is "corner of a house" (Z.).

Page 210 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Third-ranking lord of Xibalba. According to Andres Xiloj, it is at the
corners of a house that the evil influences of Xibalba enter. When a
house is under construction in Momostenango, eight skulls are
painted on the outside walls (two at each corner); they are
something like scarecrows.
HULIZNAB One of the volcanoes made by Zipacna; location uncertain.
HUMMINGBIRD HOUSE Tzununiha [4,ununiha], in which 4,unun is
"hummingbird" and ha is "house." One of the first four human
females; wife of Mahucutah.
HUNAHPU Composed of hun, "one"; ah-, occupational; and pu, from
pub, "blowgun" (B.); thus the name as a whole could be read as "One
Blowgunner." This is one of the twenty day names of the 260-day
divinatory calendar; since a speaker of Quiche no more takes note of
the "blowgunner" contained in Hunahpu than a speaker of English
takes note of the "Thor" in Thursday, the name has been left
untranslated in the body of the present work. The hun is so embedded
in the name that in both classical and modern Quiche, the particular
Hunahpu day that bears the number one is called hun hunahpu, literally
"One One-blowgunner." In the P.V., Hunahpu without any number prefix
is the name of the elder brother of Xbalanque; the two of them are
twins, the sons of One Hunahpu and Blood Woman and nephews of Seven
Hunahpu. Hunahpu and his twin succeed their father and uncle at
controlling the morning-star aspect of Venus, playing ball at an
eastern site on the brink of Xibalba. Hunahpu is most like his
father in losing his head (twice) in Xibalba; as in the case of his
father, his detached head is probably the evening-star aspect of
Venus. Ultimately he becomes the sun, or at least the sun belongs to
him. Hunahpu is also the name of one of the volcanoes made by Zipacna;
this could be the Volcan de Amatenango, five kilometers north of the
Volcan de Fuego (Fire Mouth in the P.V.), since the Annals of the
Cakchiquels describes Hunahpu as standing beside Fire Mouth.
"HUNAHPU MONKEY" Hunahpu coy [4oy]. Title of a tune played on the
flute by Hunahpu and Xbalanque; One Monkey and One Artisan, having
been turned into monkeys, danced and did acrobatics to it, climbing up
over their grandmother's house instead of using the door. Today
there are numerous Guatemalan Indian towns whose fiestas include a
Monkey Dance. The version done in Momostenango seems to confirm the
celestial aspect of One Monkey and One Artisan: two monkeys, with
stars on their costumes, climb a high pole and do acrobatics on a
tightrope.
HUNAHPU PLACE Chi hunahpu, "at Hunahpu." A place of unknown
location, occupied by vassals of the Quiche lords during the reign
of Quicab.
HUNAHPU POSSUM, HUNAHPU COYOTE Hunahpu uuch [uu4h], hunahpu utiu.
Epithets for Hunahpu and Xbalanque in their guise as vagabond
dancers and magicians. The year-bearers of the lowland Maya are the
so-called possum actors, strolling players who appear at the
transition point between two solar years. Hunahpu and Xbalanque do not
assume their guise as performers until shortly before Hunahpu

Page 211 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

becomes the sun. In the Venus tables of the Dresden Codex, day names
with solar implications do not appear until the last two divisions
in a series of five Venus cycles, reaching a crescendo in the fifth
cycle. In this last cycle, the descent of the morning star into the
underworld on a day associated with a year-bearing possum actor (the
day Eb in Yucatec and E in Quiche) would correspond to the
appearance of the vagabond Hunahpu and Xbalanque before the lords of
Xibalba.
HUNDRATH Motz, the Pleiades; the astral form of the Four Hundred
Boys. Motz appears to be an archaic form of omu4h, "four hundred"; for
that reason it is translated here as "Hundrath," the archaic (Old
Norse) source of English "hundred." In today's Quiche thought the
Pleiades symbolize a fistful of seeds. The planting season for
high-altitude maize, in March, is marked by evening settings of the
Pleiades, which leave them invisible for most of the night; by May,
when low-altitude maize is planted, the Pleiades enter a period of
complete invisibility. In the P.V., the Pleiades' first fall into
the earth corresponds to Zipacna's defeat of the Four Hundred Boys.
HURRICANE Huracan [hurakan]. The god who causes the rain and
flood that end the era of the wooden people; his aspects include
thunderbolt gods (see Newborn Thunderbolt, Raw Thunderbolt) and the
first-ranking patron deity of the Quiche people (see Tohil), and his
epithets include Heart of Sky, Heart of Earth (see above). The name
can be read as hu[n]rakan, "one-his-leg," but Andres Xiloj pointed out
that it could also mean "one out of a group" or "one of a kind," since
-rakan is a numeral classifier used in counting things that belong
to collectivities. V. gives rakan hab as "the drops of a rainstorm
when it begins or ends," apparently referring to the very large
drops that precede or follow a thunderstorm; thus hurakan could be
an abbreviated form of a phrase meaning "one large raindrop." All of
these readings point to the classic Maya god who is one-legged when he
takes the form of the so-called manikin scepter, whose names include
Hunab Ku or "Solitary God," and who is sometimes referred to as the
itz or "drop of liquid" (M.) of the sky, though he causes torrential
rainstorms. Another name for this classic god is Tahil, "Torch Mirror"
or "Obsidian Mirror" (see Tohil). This name, together with his
one-leggedness and his rains, make him cognate, in turn, with the
Nahua god named Tezcatlipoca or "Smoking Mirror," who was (among other
things) a god of the hurricane. Whatever the etymology of the word
hurakan, it may well have included the meaning "hurricane" in the
Mayan language spoken in the Gulf coast region where the Quiches
came from, a region susceptible to frequent hurricanes. Throughout the
West Indies and along the north coast of South America, especially
among Carib and Arawakan peoples, there is a god of the hurricane
and thunderbolt whose name is cognate with hurakan; in the Guianas
he is one-legged. Dictionary compilers favor a Taino (Arawakan) origin
for the word "hurricane" (which came into English from Spanish or
French) over a Mayan origin, but the Taino word itself could have been
borrowed from the Quiche homeland, which was a center of

Page 212 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

far-reaching maritime trade.
ILOCS Ilocab (singular iloc). One of the allied groups of
lineages called "the three Quiches," the other two members being the
Quiche proper (comprising the Cauecs, Greathouses, and Lord Quiches)
and the Tams.
IZTAYUL Sometimes ztayul or ztayub in the MS.; from Nahua izta,
"white, salt," and yol, "heart" (C.). Keeper of the Reception House
Mat in the fourth generation of Cauec lords, with Cotuha as Keeper
of the Mat. A second Iztayul was Keeper of the Reception House Mat
in the fifth or sixth generation of Cauecs, with Tepepul as Keeper
of the Mat. A third Iztayul was Lord Minister in the seventh
generation of Greathouse lords. See also Xtayub.
JAGUAR CONACHE Balam conache or simply conache. The first to rule
with the title of Keeper of the Mat, coming in the third generation of
Cauec lords; a contemporary of Nine Deer, who was Lord Minister in the
fourth generation of Greathouse lords. According to the Title of the
Lords of Totonicapan, Jaguar Conache was the son of Cocaib's wife
but was fathered by Cocaib's brother Cocauib while Cocaib was on his
pilgrimage to the Lord Nacxit. Nevertheless Cocaib officially
recognized Jaguar Conache as his legitimate successor in the
first-ranking Cauec lordship. But after Jaguar Conache's death the
descendants of Cocauib were shifted to the second-ranking lordship,
supplying Keepers of the Reception House Mat (beginning with Jaguar
Conache's own son Iztayul), while the first-ranking title of Keeper of
the Mat reverted to the direct descendants of Cocaib.
JAGUAR HOUSE Balami ha. One of the tests of Xibalba, third or
fourth in the sequence of test houses. These houses may correspond
to the periods when Venus is invisible between its appearances as
morning and evening star (see Bat House). Jaguar House is also the
name of a people belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes the
Quiches regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east.
JAGUAR NIGHT Balam acab [a3ab]. One of the first four human males
and founder of the Greathouse lineage.
JAGUAR QUITZE Balam quitze in the MS.; balam is "jaguar" and quitze
(or better 4itze) could well be an archaic form of 4iche, "Quiche."
One of the first four human males and founder of the Cauec lineage.
JAGUAR ROPES Balam colob, composed of balam, "jaguar"; colo, "rope"
(B.); and -b, plural. A people belonging to a group of thirteen allied
tribes the Quiches regarded as having come (like themselves) from
the east.
JOCOTES Quinom [3inom], also meaning "richness." A tropical fruit
(Spondias purpurea), yellow in color and resembling small plums.
KEEPER OF THE BAT MAT Ahpo zotzil [zo4,il], "keeper-mat
bat-ness." A Cakchiquel lineage whose god was Calm Snake.
KEEPER OF THE DANCER MAT Ahpo xa [xahil in other sources],
"keeper-mat dancer." A Cakchiquel lineage.
KEEPER OF THE MAT Ahpop, "person of [or person whose occupation is]
mat," a woven mat being a metonym for a council (whose members sat
on a mat or mats) and probably, at the same time, a metaphor for a

Page 213 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

council (whose members might have been thought of as being
interwoven like a mat or as serving to interweave those whom they
represented). Keeper of the Mat or Lord Keeper of the Mat was the
title of the lord who ranked first among the Cauecs and headed one
of the nine great houses into which their lineage was divided after
the founding of Rotten Cane. He also ranked first among the four lords
who jointly ruled the Quiche state from Rotten Cane, with the Keeper
of the Reception House Mat, the Lord Minister, and the Crier to the
People for the Lords coming below him. The signs or emblems that
accompanied these four titles (or at least the first two of them) were
given out by Nacxit, the lord of a "populous domain" located in "the
east"; the Keeper of the Mat was entitled to have four superimposed
canopies over his head, with the others having three, two, and one,
respectively. During the reign of Quicab, the title of Keeper of the
Mat was conferred upon the heads of twenty vassal lineages, presumably
lineages that were specifically vassals of the Cauecs.
KEEPER OF THE PLUMED SERPENT Ahcucumatz [ah3ucumatz], "person of
[or person whose occupation is] quetzal serpent." Title of the
priest of the god Sovereign Plumed Serpent at Rotten Cane; he was
fourth in rank among the lords of the Cauecs and headed one of the
nine great houses into which their lineage was divided after the
founding of Rotten Cane. The temple of Sovereign Plumed Serpent was
a round tower near the center of the main plaza, halfway between the
temples of Tohil and Auilix. Its circular foundation, whose outline is
still visible in the pavement of the plaza, is the site of an active
shrine.
KEEPER OF THE RECEPTION HOUSE MAT Ahpop camha [4amha], person of
[or person whose occupation is] mat receive-house." That the cam- of
the MS. should be 4am-, "receive," rather than 3am-, "stairway," is
indicated by V. and G., both of whom list an analogous Cakchiquel
title as 4amahay. The Keeper (or Lord Keeper) of the Reception House
Mat ranked second among the Cauec lords and was the head of one of the
nine great houses into which the Cauecs were divided after the
founding of Rotten Cane. He ranked second among the four lords who
jointly ruled the Quiche state from Rotten Cane, coming below the
Keeper of the Mat and above the Lord Minister and the Crier to the
People for the Lords. If there was a council connected with the
"Reception House Mat," it might have consisted of the Keeper of the
Reception House Mat himself (representing the Cauecs), the two Mothers
of the Reception House (one each for the Cauecs and Greathouses),
and the Minister of the Reception House and the Great Reception
House (both representing the Greathouses). If these lords were like
the Cakchiquel 4amahay, their business was the collection of tribute.
KEEPER OF TOHIL Ahtohil, "person of [or person whose occupation is]
Tohil." Title of the priest of the god Tohil at Rotten Cane; he was
third in rank among the lords of the Cauecs and headed one of the nine
great houses into which their lineage was divided after the founding
of Rotten Cane.
KILT 4,uum, "hide." The protective kilt worn by players of the ball

Page 214 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

game in the P.V. (see ball court and gaming equipment); this kilt is
clearly shown to be a hide in classic Maya art of the lowlands.
LAKE-SEA Chopalo, composed of cho, "lake," and palo, "sea," but
pronounced as a single word. In this context "lake" and "sea" are
complementary metonyms that together produce a term for all pooled
water, but without any final reduction of the difference between lakes
and seas. This composite term is used in contemporary Quiche prayers.
LAMACS Lamaquib, in which -ib is plural. A people belonging to a
group of thirteen allied tribes the Quiches regarded as having come
(like themselves) from the east.
LAUGHING FALCON Uac; its cry is uac co, uac co in the text. In
Tzotzil Maya, the laughing falcon is vakos and its cry is vakvon (L.).
That vakos and uac are the same bird is confirmed by the fact that
Hunahpu and Xbalanque patch the wounded eye of the uac with gum; the
laughing falcon has a black patch around the eye. It is amusing to
note that the uac of the P.V. catches a snake; the scientific name
of the laughing falcon is Herpetotheres cachinnans. This bird is
obviously closely related to the uoc mentioned elsewhere; both birds
are messengers, and there are reasons for thinking the uoc corresponds
to Jupiter and the uac to Saturn (see Falcon).
"LIGHT THAT CAME FROM ACROSS THE SEA, THE" Zac petenac chaca palo
[zak petenak 4haka palo], "light come-from-perfect other-side sea." An
epithet for the P.V., alluding to the fact that the sons of the
first Quiche lords, returning from a pilgrimage to the great lord
named Nacxit, "brought back the writings about Tulan" from "across the
sea." "Sea" is probably a hyperbole for "lagoon" here; other Quiche
documents call the body of water in question both a "lake" and a
"sea."
LINEAGE Chinamit, from Nahua chinamitl, "hedge or enclosure of cane
plants" (D.). In Quiche this refers to an organized and named
patrilineage (or segment thereof) or to its lands; in the P.V.
chinamit seems to be synonymous with nim ha or "great house" in most
contexts.
LOLMET Each of the three ruling lineages of the Quiche included one
lord whose title incorporated this word; in G., lolmay is "he who is
sent on business," suggesting "emissary" as a possible translation
of Lolmet. Lolmet Quehnay was the title of the lord who ranked seventh
among the Cauecs and headed one of the nine great houses into which
their lineage was divided after the founding of Rotten Cane. Great
Lolmet Yeoltux was the title of the lord who ranked ninth among the
Greathouses and headed one of their nine great houses; this title is
omitted in the second of the two lists of Greathouse lords. Lord
Lolmet or Lolmet of the Lords was the title of the lord who ranked
second among the Lord Quiches and headed one of their four great
houses.
LORD QUICHES Ahau quiche [4iche]. Third-ranking Quiche lineage,
founded by Mahucutah and divided into four segments or great houses
after the founding of Rotten Cane.
MACAMOB Possibly from macamo, "to do something suddenly" (V.).

Page 215 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

One of the volcanoes made by Zipacna; location uncertain.
MACAW HOUSE Caquixaha [cakixaha]. One of the first four human
females; wife of True Jaguar.
MACAW OWL Caquix [cakix] tucur, in which cakix is specifically
the term for the scarlet macaw. Third-ranking Military Keeper of the
Mat for the lords of Xibalba, a messenger. This is clearly the
so-called Moan bird of classic Maya vase paintings, who seems to
have the head and wings of an owl but the tail of a macaw. Along
with three other owl messengers, he may correspond to the planet
Mercury (see Shooting Owl).
MAHUCUTAH Possibly ma, "not," with hucotah, "right away, in a
moment" (B.), giving something like "nonmomentary." One of the first
four human males and founder of the Lord Quiche lineage.
MAKER, MODELER Tzacol bitol [4,akol bitol], consisting of an
agentive suffix, -ol, added to two different verb stems. In both
classical and modern Quiche, 4,ak- has to do with making things out of
clay, plaster, cement, or stone; the objects made range through
bricks, walls, monuments, mounds of earth, and buildings of all sizes.
Bit-, on the other hand, has to do with making definite shapes out
of a pliable and otherwise formless material, as when vessels are
shaped out of clay. Andres Xiloj said of 4,ak- (whose agentive form
would be 4,akal today), "This is to make or construct, like a
building, a wall." Of bit- he said, "This bitic is to form, as when we
were small and played with mud; we made forms. Kabitic, 'we form it'."
He saw 4,akol and bitol as referring, respectively, to the amassing of
clay and then its shaping into forms such as vessels or figures. In
the P.V. these two words are names or epithets for the gods who make
the earth, plants, animals, and humans. The same gods are also
called Bearer, Begetter, and they include Sovereign Plumed Serpent.
MAKER OF THE BLUE-GREEN PLATE, MAKER OF THE BLUE-GREEN BOWL
Ahraxa la3 [lak], ahraxa tzel, "person-of-blue-green plate,
person-of-blue-green bowl." First used as an epithet for Xpiyacoc
and Xmucane; later appears in a list of the arts and crafts
practiced by their grandsons, One Monkey and One Artisan. The plate
and bowl may refer ultimately to the earth and sky; the term raxa
covers both the green of a verdant landscape and the blue of the
sky. Andres Xiloj pointed out that when the head of a contemporary
patrilineage (who is always a diviner) dies, his successor must be
installed in office by the head of a neighboring lineage, who is hired
as an ah4hahbal lak, ah4hahbal tasa, "washer of the plate, washer of
the cup." Before the new lineage head can take office, the "washer"
must go to all that lineage's shrines and clean out the ashes of all
the offerings burned by the deceased lineage head. Such shrines are
lined and covered with slabs of stone and pieces of pottery, which are
spoken of as "plates" and "cups." In the P.V., Maker of the Blue-Green
Plate, Maker of the Blue-Green Bowl would refer to Xpiyacoc and
Xmucane in their general roles as those who look after (and even
create) shrines, or it might refer to pottery vessels used for burning
incense rather than to shrines as such.

Page 216 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

MARIGOLD Yia [iya]. A species of marigold called pericon in
Guatemalan Spanish (Tagetes lucida), a common roadside herb in the
highlands, with all-yellow flowers. In the P.V. (as among today's
Quiche) the burning of marigolds, together with yarrow (see below),
constitutes a more modest offering than the burning of copal incense.
MATASANOS Ahache [ahachee]. A tropical fruit (Casimiroa edulis),
large, pulpy, thin-skinned, yellow inside and chartreuse outside;
called matasanos in Guatemalan Spanish.
MEAUAN The mountain beneath which Hunahpu and Xbalanque defeated
Earthquake. Possibly located within the great bend of the Rio Negro or
Chixoy, north of Rabinal.
METEOR Cabicac or chabicac [4habi3a3], "globe of fire" (T.),
literally "arrow fire"; a comet, by contrast, is uhe 4humil, "star's
tail." A place of unknown location, occupied by vassals of the
Quiche lords during the reign of Quicab.
MIDDLE OF THE HOUSE, MIDDLE OF THE HARVEST, LIVING CORN,
EARTHEN
FLOOR Nicah [ni4ah] ha, nicah bichoc [bichok], cazam [4azam] ah,
chatam [4hatam] uleu, "middle house, middle shucked-corn, living
corn-ear, bed (or slab) earth"; the gloss of bichoc is from B. When
Hunahpu and Xbalanque left their grandmother to go to Xibalba, they
"planted" ears of corn in the middle of their house, up above its
earthen floor. For their grandmother, the drying (or ripening) and
renewed sprouting of corn served as a sign of their death and rebirth,
and she burned copal incense before ears of corn as a memorial to
them. As Andres Xiloj pointed out, her act corresponds to the
present-day customs of a patrilineage shrine called the uinel, located
near a cornfield.
MIDDLE OF THE PLAIN Nicacah tacah [ni4ah ta3ah],"middle plain."
Name of the god received by True Jaguar at Tulan Zuyua.
MIDMOST SEERS Nicuachinel [ni4uachinel], composed of ni4, "middle";
uachin, "see with one's own eyes" (V.); -el, agentive. A term for
diviners, applied both to Xpiyacoc and Xmucane and to Xulu and
Pacam. It could mean that a diviner sees into the middle of things, or
it could mean that a diviner recovers the vision that the first humans
had when they could see everything from the spot where they were,
without having to walk around.
MILITARY KEEPER OF THE MAT Rahpop achih, "its-keeper-mat
soldier." Title held by the four owls who served as messengers for the
lords of Xibalba. One of the titles conferred upon the heads of vassal
lineages during the reign of Quicab.
MILITARY MINISTER U3alel achih, "its-minister soldier." One of
the titles conferred upon the heads of vassal lineages during the
reign of Quicab.
MILITARY WALLS, MILITARY CORNERS Rahtzalam [rah4,alam] achih, utzam
[utzaam] achih, "his-keeper-wall soldier, his-corner (or angle)
soldier." 4,alam is "wall" in V., while other sources give "plank";
the "walls" and "corners" here are undoubtedly those of a stockade.
Military Walls and Military Corners are among the titles conferred

Page 217 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

upon the heads of vassal lineages during the reign of Quicab; they
seem analogous to the "sides" and "corners" of the sky-earth,
suggesting that a fortified town was seen as a microcosm.
MINISTER 3alel, possibly from 3alunel, "one who holds something
in his arms." Lord Minister was the title of the lord who ranked first
among the Greathouses and headed one of the nine great houses into
which their lineage was divided after the founding of Rotten Cane.
He also ranked third among the four lords who jointly ruled the Quiche
state from Rotten Cane, coming below the Keeper of the Mat and the
Keeper of the Reception House Mat and above the Crier to the People
for the Lords. During the reign of Quicab, when Quema was Lord
Minister of the Greathouses, the title of Minister was conferred
upon the heads of twenty vassal lineages, presumably lineages that
were specifically vassals of the Greathouses.
MINISTER FOR THE LORDS 3alel ahau, "minister lord," with ahau
referring, as it does when it ends other titles, to the Lord Quiche
lineage. One of the titles conferred upon the heads of one or more
vassal lineages during the reign of Quicab, when Armadillo Dung was
Lord Crier to the People for the Lord Quiches. Presumably these
would have been vassals of the Lord Quiches in particular, although
Minister is not listed as one of the titles actually held by their
lineage.
MINISTER FOR THE ZAQUICS 3alel zaquic. Title of the lord who ranked
second among the Zaquics and headed one of the two great houses into
which their lineage was divided after the founding of Rotten Cane. The
Zaquics may not have acquired this title until the reign of Quicab,
two generations after the founding of Rotten Cane, since it is
elsewhere listed as one of the titles conferred on the heads of vassal
lineages during the reign of Quicab. It could also be that the Zaquics
themselves ennobled one or more lineages subordinate to themselves,
titling them Ministers for the Zaquics in order to distinguish them
from the Ministers created by the Greathouses at this same time.
MINISTER OF THE RECEPTION HOUSE 3alel 4amha, "minister
receive-house." Title of the lord who ranked third among the
Greathouses and headed one of the nine great houses into which their
lineage was divided after the founding of Rotten Cane.
MIXTAM COPAL Mixtam pom, in which pom is "copal incense" and the
rest is a Nahua name of uncertain translation. The kind of copal
incense used by Jaguar Quitze to incense the direction of the rising
sun. Andres Xiloj suggested that this might be Ixtahuacan pom, a
kind of copal from the area of Ixtahuacan and Cuilco (Mam towns)
that is highly valued by the Quiche today.
MONKEY HOUSE Batza [ba4,a], composed of ba4,, "howler monkey,"
and ha, "house." Lord Minister in the sixth generation of Greathouse
lords.
MOTHER-FATHER Chuchcahau [chuchkahau], composed of chuch, "mother,"
and kahau, "father," but pronounced as a single word. In this
context "mother" and "father" are complementary metonyms that together
produce the sense of "parent," but without any final reduction of

Page 218 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

the difference between motherhood and fatherhood. In the P.V., the
composite term thus produced is used as a metaphor for the gods called
Maker and Modeler and less figuratively for the first four human
males, three of whom become founders of patrilineages. In several
present-day Quiche towns the heads of patrilineages, who are
daykeepers and are also responsible for lineage shrines, are called
mother-fathers even though they are all males (see also Mothers of the
Word, Fathers of the Word).
MOTHER OF THE RECEPTION HOUSE Uchuch camha [4amha], "its-mother
receive-house." Title of the ninth in rank among the Cauec lords (also
titled Sovereign Yaqui) and head of one of the nine great houses
into which their lineage was divided after the founding of Rotten
Cane. The fifth-ranking lord of the Greathouses, who headed one of the
nine great houses of their lineage, was also titled Mother of the
Reception House.
MOTHERS OF THE WORD, FATHERS OF THE WORD Uchuch tzih, ucahau
[ukahau] tzih. An epithet of the Great Toastmasters, suggesting that
they were ritual heads of patrilineages (see mother-father) and that
they may have been responsible for the Word (see Ancient Word) that is
set forth in the Popol Vuh itself.
MOUNTAIN-PLAIN Huyubtacah [huyubta3ah], composed of huyub,
"mountain (or hill)," and ta3ah, "plain (or flat)," but pronounced
as a single word. In this context "mountain" and "plain" are
complementary metonyms that together produce the sense of "earth," but
without any final reduction of the difference between mountains and
plains. In modern Quiche ritual language, at least, huyubta3ah (or
huyub by itself) is a common metaphor for the human body. In the
P.V. the gods conceive humans at the same time they conceive the
earth, but a great deal of time passes before they succeed in actually
making humans.
NACXIT From Nahua naui, "four," and ikxitl, "foot" (C.). In Nahua
sources this is a title held by the king named Quetzalcoatl; in the
Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel, a lord named Nacxit Xuchit is
mentioned in connection with events that sound like part of the
Nahua legend of Quetzalcoatl. In the P.V. Nacxit gives out the emblems
of lordship to Cocaib, Coacutec, and Coahau, who come to him on a long
pilgrimage.
NANCE Tapal. A tropical fruit (Byrsonima crassifolia), small,
yellow and purple.
NECK CANYON Cu [ku] ziuan, "neck, narrow place" (from kul)
"canyon." A canyon crossed by the road to Xibalba (the underworld).
NET WEAVE TRIBE Amac [ama3] uquin cat [4at], composed of ama3,
"tribe"; u-, "its"; quin, "do the warp in weaving" (B.); and 4at,
"net." Place where the Ilocs gave a home to their patron deity, not
far from where the Tams, Cauecs, Greathouses, and Lord Quiches did the
same; also the place where the Ilocs were when the dawn first came.
NEWBORN NANAHUAC, RAW NANAHUAC Chipi [4hipi] nanauac, raxa
nanauac,
in which 4hipi is "youngest child"; raxa is "green, blue" or "raw,

Page 219 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

fresh"; and nanahuac seems to be the Quiche equivalent of Nanahuatzin,
who in Nahua mythology throws the thunderbolt that opens up the
mountain filled with the corn needed to make human flesh (see Broken
Place). In the P.V., Newborn Nanahuac and Raw Nanahuac are alternative
names for Newborn Thunderbolt and Raw Thunderbolt.
NEWBORN THUNDERBOLT, RAW THUNDERBOLT Chipa [4hipa] caculha
[cakulha], raxa caculha in which 4hipa is "youngest child"; raxa is
"green, blue" or "raw, fresh"; and cakulha is specifically a bolt of
lightning (with the accompanying thunder), as contrasted with
coyopa, which is sheet lightning (seen in the distance and without
distinguishable bolts or audible thunder). Gods who are included under
the Heart of Sky, Heart of Earth rubric and make up a threesome when
combined with the name Hurricane. Lucas Pacheco recognized their names
and said that in today's prayers they also go under the names of two
archangels, Michael and Gabriel.
NINE DEER Beleheb queh. Lord Minister in the fourth generation of
Greathouse lords, when Jaguar Conache was Keeper of the Mat. Another
Nine Deer was Lord Minister in the ninth generation. At least the
first of these two was apparently born on the day Nine Deer on the
divinatory calendar; the second was probably named after the first.
Today such a birth date would augur a domineering, articulate, and
masculine character with shamanic inclinations, and because of the
relatively high number these qualities should be obvious.
NINE DOG Beleheb tzi [4,ii]. Keeper of the Reception House Mat in
the twelfth generation of Cauec lords, apparently born on the day Nine
Dog on the divinatory calendar. Today, such a birth date would augur
confusion, weakness, promiscuity, and ill fortune. According to the
P.V. Nine Dog was hanged by the Castilians; other sources have him
burned at the stake. In any case he and Three Deer were executed by
Alvarado in 1524, immediately following the fall of Rotten Cane.
NOSEPIECE Caxeon, possibly derived from kaxah [3axah], "to run
through, as with an arrow" (T.); -on could be the substantive suffix
or it could be related to onih, "to nail" (E.). One of the emblems
of lordship given out by Nacxit; the Annals of the Cakchiquels
mentions that noses were pierced when the emblems were given out but
does not refer to the ornament itself. Of the various names given to
the emblems in the P.V., caxeon is the most likely candidate as a term
for this particular item.
ONE DEATH, SEVEN DEATH Hun came, uucub [uukub] came, in which hun
and uukub are "one" and "seven." Came is one of the twenty day names
of the divinatory calendar; it shares the same root with such forms as
camel, "dead person," but it is not the ordinary term for "death"
(that would be camic or camical). One and Seven Death rank first and
second among the lords of Xibalba. They are treated in the narrative
as two persons, as are One and Seven Hunahpu (see below), but their
numbers show that they represent all thirteen possible days bearing
the name came, as Andres Xiloj pointed out (see the notes to the
Introduction).
ONE HUNAHPU, SEVEN HUNAHPU Hun hunahpu, uucub [uukub] hunahpu.

Page 220 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

The sons, elder and younger respectively, of Xpiyacoc and Xmucane; One
Hunahpu is the father (by Xbaquiyalo) of One Monkey and One Artisan,
later becoming the father (by Blood Woman) of Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
One and Seven Hunahpu, as their numbers show, represent all thirteen
possible days bearing the name Hunahpu (see the notes to the
Introduction). They are responsible for Venus in its aspect as a
morning star that first rises on a day bearing the name Hunahpu;
such a morning star appears at the start of each fifth Venus cycle.
One Hunahpu's severed head, when placed in the fork of a tree by the
lords of Xibalba, becomes Venus in its aspect as an evening star
that first rises on a day bearing the name Came or "Death"; this is
the particular evening star that follows after a Hunahpu morning star.
ONE-LEGGED OWL Huracan [hurakan] tucur, "one-his-leg owl." As
Andres Xiloj pointed out, owls stand on only one leg at a time.
Second-ranking Military Keeper of the Mat for the lords of Xibalba,
a messenger. Along with three other owl messengers, he may
correspond to the planet Mercury (see Shooting Owl).
ONE MONKEY, ONE ARTISAN Hun batz [ba4,], hun chouen, in which hun
is "one"; ba4, is "howler monkey"; and chouen is Yucatec for "artisan"
and archaic Yucatec for "howler monkey." The sons of One Hunahpu and
Xbaquiyalo; patron deities of flautists, singers, writers, carvers,
lapidaries, jewelers, sawyers, carpenters, incense makers, and
metallurgists. Hunahpu and Xbalanque (their younger half-brothers)
leave them marooned in a tall tree, where they become monkeys; this is
also the beginning of their celestial career (see "Hunahpu Monkey").
They probably correspond to the planet Mars.
ONE TOH Hun toh, a day on the divinatory calendar. The god of the
Rabinals, declared by the writers of the P.V. to be equivalent to
the Tohil of the Cauecs, Ilocs, and Tams.
"OUR PLACE IN THE SHADOWS" Camuhibal [kamuhibal],
"our-being-shaded-place." An epithet for the P.V., referring to the
period (lasting about two-thirds of the book) before the first sunrise
is seen; the following period is referred to by another epithet,
"The Dawn of Life." The implication of "shadows" in the present
epithet is that the light of dawn and of sunrise were really there
(somewhere) all along, but that "our" position as humans with
respect to this light was such that we remained in darkness.
PAINT OF POWDERED YELLOW STONE Tatil canabah [3anabah]; tatil may
be the same as titil, "bright powder" (B.); 3anabah is an unidentified
"yellow stone" (V.) and a paint applied to the body (R.). One of the
emblems of lordship given out by Nacxit.
PANACHE Iachuach, B. gives yachuachibeh as "to crown." Part of
the gear needed by players of the ball game in the P.V. (see ball
court and gaming equipment), probably corresponding to the long
bunch of feathers shown attached to the crowns of the heads of the
players in the ball-court reliefs of Chichen Itza.
PARROT FEATHERS, HERON FEATHERS Chiyom, "parrot feathers" (R.), and
aztapulul, which is partly derived from aztatl, a Nahua term for a
white heron (D.). Among the emblems of lordship given out by Nacxit.

Page 221 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

PATAXTE Pec. Theobroma bicolor, a lower grade of cacao than cacao
proper (or caco in Quiche), more widely known in Mesoamerica by its
Nahua name, pataxte. The seeds of pataxte and cacao, which are
native to the New World, were and are used by Mesoamerican Indians
to make cocoa and chocolate.
PATOHIL See Tohil.
PAUILIX See Auilix
PERSON OF BAM Uinac [uinak] bam, "person," followed by an
untranslatable proper name. Crier to the People for the Lords in the
ninth generation of Lord Quiche lords.
PETATAYUB Partly from Nahua petatl, "mat" (C.). A flat place
(ta3ah) where a "mountain" (huyub) of shattered stones from
conquered citadels was piled up during the reign of Quicab. Ximenez
takes this flat to be the south coastal plain of Guatemala, but
ta3ah can refer to any level place, down to the size of a cornfield.
Petatayub may be the spot known today as Altar Place (chi mumuz), a
prominent pile of broken stones on an otherwise stoneless flat eight
kilometers northwest of San Pedro Jocopilas. On the south side of this
pile is an active shrine.
PLACE OF ADVICE Chi pixab, "at advice (or counsel)." A mountain
where the Quiches and other tribes held a council during their
migrations. It is a peak, still known by this name, of the Montana los
Achiotes, about seven kilometers west of San Andres Sajcabaja.
PLACE OF BALL GAME SACRIFICE Pucbal Chah [puzbal chaah]; B. gives
puzbal as "place of sacrifice," and chaah is "ball game." The place
where the decapitated body of One Hunahpu and the complete body of
Seven Hunahpu were buried by the lords of Xibalba. Probably not a
place name, but rather a name for the altar where losing ball
players were sacrificed. That such altars were in or near ball
courts is indicated by the fact that the classical Quiche term for a
ball court, hom, is today the term for a graveyard. Hunahpu and
Xbalanque, addressing the remains of Seven Hunahpu (their paternal
uncle), tell him, "You will be prayed to here"; today, as Andres Xiloj
pointed out, people visit graveyards on days bearing the name Hunahpu.
PLACE OF SPILT WATER See Spilt Water.
PLANK PLACE Chitemah, "at-plank"; tema is a bench or a roofing
beam. A place of unknown location, occupied by vassals of the Quiche
lords during the reign of Quicab.
PLASTER HOUSE Zaccabaha [zakcabaha], composed of zakcaba, "plaster"
(B.), and ha, "house." The town known today as San Andres Sajcabaja.
Formerly a Caoque citadel, conquered by the Quiche lords during the
reign of Quicab. Today the inhabitants speak Quiche.
PLUMED SERPENT Cucumatz [3ucumatz], from 3u3, "quetzal bird" or
"quetzal feathers," and cumatz, "serpent." Keeper of the Mat in the
fourth or fifth generation of Cauec lords, named after the god
listed elsewhere as Sovereign Plumed Serpent. The P.V. mentions Cotuha
(not the same Cotuha who preceded Plumed Serpent as Keeper of the Mat)
as the Keeper of the Reception House Mat who corresponded to Plumed
Serpent in a number of places, but elsewhere states that Plumed

Page 222 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

Serpent served as both Keeper of the Mat and Keeper of the Reception
House Mat; perhaps Cotuha died during the reign of Plumed Serpent
and was not replaced until after the latter's death. However that
might be, it was Plumed Serpent and Cotuha who together founded Rotten
Cane. Both of them were regarded as lords of genius- that is, as lords
with powerful spirit familiars- and Plumed Serpent in particular put
on miraculous demonstrations of shamanic power. Here, as in the case
of his central Mexican counterpart (Quetzalcoatl), it is difficult
to separate Plumed Serpent as king from Plumed Serpent as deity.
POINT OF THE ARROW, ANGLE OF THE BOWSTRING Uchi 4ha, uchi cam
[4aam], "its mouth arrow, its mouth cord"; Andres Xiloj pointed out
that in Quiche, the "mouth" of an arrow is its tip, while the
"mouth" of a bowstring is the point at which the butt end of the arrow
is pulled back against it. Epithets for the vanguard lineages sent out
to occupy conquered citadels during the reign of Quicab.
POORWILL, DANCE OF THE Xahoh puhuy, "dance poorwill." The name of a
dance done by Hunahpu and Xbalanque in their guise as vagabonds.
POPOL VUH See Council Book.
PRAWN HOUSE Chomiha, composed of chom, "shrimp" (B.), and ha,
"house." One of the first four human females; wife of Jaguar Night.
The "prawn" etymology- as opposed, for example, to 4humil or "star"lets the four women's names fit together in a pattern, making for
two with maritime names (Celebrated Seahouse and Prawn House) and
two with avian names (Hummingbird House and Macaw House).
PUMA'S PAW, JAGUAR'S PAW Tzicuil [4,icuil] coh, tzicuil balam; V.
gives 4,ic as "heel of hand," and coh and balam are "puma" and
"jaguar." Among the emblems of lordship given out by Nacxit.
PUS MASTER, JAUNDICE MASTER Ahal puh, ahal 3ana, "owner pus,
owner yellowness." Fifth- and sixth-ranking lords of Xibalba.
PUS RIVER Puhia [puhiaa], "pus water." A river that crosses the
road to Xibalba (the underworld). This name, along with Blood River,
might have been an actual toponym, referring to a large, muddy river
of the kind that originates in the Guatemalan highlands but flows into
the northern lowlands. For today's Quiche the regions that drop off
toward the Atlantic, especially in the area of Coban, are an abode
of evil.
QUEHNAY See Lolmet.
QUEMA Also spelled queema in the MS. Lord Minister in the tenth
generation of Greathouse lords. Yet he is also mentioned among the
contemporaries of the Keeper of the Mat named Quicab, who ruled in the
sixth or seventh generation of Cauec lords.
QUENECH AHAU From Yucatec Kinich Ahau, "sun-eye lord" (C.), one
of the names of the lowland Maya sun god. In the P.V. this is the name
of a people belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes the Quiches
regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east.
QUETZAL Cuc [3u3]; according to G., raxon, literally "blued" or
"greened" (and translated "blue green"), is a synonym for 3u3.
"Quetzal," the name by which this bird is best known, is from Nahua
quetzalli. Pharomachrus mocinno, the most spectacular bird in the

Page 223 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

New World, confined to localized cloud forest habitats scattered
from Chiapas to Panama; red breast but otherwise mostly green (with
blue iridescence). The two-foot-long tail coverts were a major item of
tribute and a major feature of lordly regalia throughout Mesoamerica.
QUIBA HOUSE, THOSE OF Ahquibaha, in which ah- is "persons from" and
ha is "house." A people belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes
the Quiches regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east.
QUICAB Possibly 4i, "many," with 3ab, "hand" or "arm." Keeper of
the Mat in the sixth or seventh generation of Cauec lords. Quicab
greatly expanded the Quiche state, destroying the citadels of
neighboring peoples and occupying them with vassal lineages drawn from
the immediate vicinity of Rotten Cane. He ennobled the heads of many
vassal lineages, including those who had served him well in his
conquests, but members of this new nobility later perpetrated a revolt
(as described in both the Title of the Lords of Totonicapan and the
Annals of the Cakchiquels but not in the P.V.). They failed in an
assassination attempt, but the lineages with military titles (see
under Military) gained in power.
QUICHE Quiche [4iche] and sometimes queche [4eche], possibly from
4i, "many," and chee, "trees," thus carrying approximately the same
meaning as Cuautemallan, the Nahua name for what is now called
Guatemala. Quiche is used in several different senses in the P.V. As a
people, the Quiche proper consist of those who descend from Jaguar
Quitze, Jaguar Night, and Mahucutah- that is to say, the Cauec,
Greathouse, and Lord Quiche lineages- and who worship the gods
Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz. "The three Quiches" include the Quiche
proper, as just described, together with two further lineages whose
god was Tohil, the Tams and Ilocs. This Quiche threesome is said to
have been inseparable since its members were all at Tulan Zuyua
together, and to have shared the same language- a language which is
also called Quiche. Late in the narrative Quiche becomes a toponym
referring to the vicinity of Rotten Cane, covering Rotten Cane itself,
the modern site of Santa Cruz (three kilometers to the east of
Rotten Cane), and probably also Bearded Place (half a kilometer to the
south of Rotten Cane). By metonymic extension, Quiche also becomes the
name for the conquest state formed by the Quiche threesome after the
founding of Rotten Cane.
QUITZALCUAT Equivalent to Nahua Quetzalcoatl, "quetzal serpent."
One of the names of the god of the Yaqui people, who is said by the
writers of the P.V. to be the same as Tohil.
RABINALS Rabinaleb, in which -eb is plural. The people known
today as the Achi, whose principal town is Rabinal. Their language,
Achi, may be considered either a dialect of Quiche or a separate
language of the Quichean family; its speakers are located to the
northeast of the speakers of Quiche proper. They belonged to a group
of thirteen allied tribes the Quiches regarded as having come (like
themselves) from the east. One of the Rabinal citadels, Spilt Water,
was conquered by the Quiche lords during the reign of Quicab.
RATTLING HOUSE Xuxulim ha; B. gives xuxulim as a continuous buzzing

Page 224 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

or humming. This is one of the tests of Xibalba, also called Cold
House; it rattles because of continuous drafts and hail. This test
comes second or third in the sequence of test houses. These houses may
correspond to the periods when Venus is invisible between its
appearances as morning and evening star (see Bat House).
RAZOR HOUSE Chaim ha; chay or cha refers to cutting instruments
or projectile points made by percussion techniques, probably
obsidian blades in the present context. One of the tests of Xibalba,
fifth or second in the sequence of test houses. These houses may
correspond to the periods when Venus is invisible between its
appearances as morning and evening star (see Bat House).
RED BANNER Ca3lacan [cakla3an], with cak, "red"; B. gives la3am
as "banner." Crier to the People for the Lords in the third generation
of Lord Quiche lords.
RED ROAD Cacabe [cakabe]. One of four cosmic roads (see
Crossroads).
ROAD OF XIBALBA Ri be xibalba, "the road Xibalba," also called
Black Road (see Crossroads). The road that beckoned to One and Seven
Hunahpu when they were on their way to Xibalba and led to their
deaths. At present ube xibalba, "its-road Xibalba," is the Quiche term
for the black cleft in the Milky Way. From the identity of One and
Seven Hunahpu (or their rubber ball) as Venus, and from the fact
that they go down to Xibalba from a ball court located far in the
east, it may be deduced that they descended at a time when Venus was
ending its period of visibility as the morning star in a sidereal
position that was in or near the Milky Way cleft. Venus takes five
complete cycles to repeat its sidereal position, which is the same
number of cycles it takes for its periodic reappearance as a morning
star to return to a day bearing the name Hunahpu.
ROBLES, DON PEDRO DE Lord Minister in the thirteenth generation
of Greathouse lords, in office when the P.V. was written. Since his
predecessor was still in office in September of 1554, the P.V. must
have been written after that time.
ROCK ROWS, FURROWED SANDS Cholochic abah, bocotahinac [bocotahinak]
zanaieb, composed of a reduplicated form of cholo-, "to order, put
in a row"; abah, "rocks"; boco-, "uproot"; tahii-, "cultivate,
plough"; -nak, perfect; and zanaieb, "sands." The place where Jaguar
Quitze, Jaguar Night, Mahucutah, and True Jaguar crossed through a
palo or "sea" on their migration from Tulan Zuyua. The name is, in
effect, a description of a lowland Maya causeway.
ROJAS, DON JUAN DE Lord Keeper of the Mat in the fourteenth
generation of Cauec lords, in office when the P.V. was written. His
title was recognized by the Spanish; he retained his serfs, was
given a reception room in the Royal Palace at Santiago Guatemala,
served as a sort of minister of native affairs, and attempted to
regain jurisdiction over the towns that had been conquered by the
Quiche state before the arrival of the Spanish. He was still in office
in 1554; since he was no longer signing documents by November of 1558,
the P.V. must have been written before that date.

Page 225 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

ROTTEN CANE Cumaracaah [3umarakah], "rotten-plural-cane plant." The
citadel built by the Quiche lords after they left Bearded Place,
founded by the Keeper of the Mat named Plumed Serpent. At Bearded
Place there had been only three great houses or lordly lineages, but
after the founding of Rotten Cane the Cauecs divided into nine
parts, the Greathouses into nine parts, the Lord Quiches into four
parts, and there were also two divisions of Zaquics (not mentioned
at Bearded Place). Except for the two divisions of the Zaquics,
which shared a single palace, each of these lineage segments
apparently had a separate palace, making twenty-three palaces in
all. It was from Rotten Cane that Quicab greatly expanded the Quiche
state, and it was Rotten Cane that was burned by Pedro de Alvarado
in 1524. The ruins, better known by their Nahua name, Utatlan, are
located three kilometers west of Santa Cruz Quiche (see also Great
Monument of Tohil, Auilix, Hacauitz, Keeper of the Plumed Serpent,
Councilor of the Ball Court, Granary, and Bird House).
RUBBER BALL Qui4, literally "blood" but also referring to rubber,
rubber balls in particular. Europeans saw rubber balls for the first
time in the West Indies and Mesoamerica. In the P.V. a rubber ball
is part of the gaming equipment (see under that heading) used by One
and Seven Hunahpu and by their sons, Hunahpu and Xbalanque. The ball
used by their opponents in Xibalba is not called qui4 (except by a
falsehood that fails to deceive Hunahpu and Xbalanque) but is rather
referred to by its proper name (see White Dagger) or by the term
chaah, which is also a term for the ball game itself (whatever kind of
ball it is played with).
SANTA CRUZ Bishop Francisco Marroquin gave this name to Rotten Cane
in 1539, but the town that came to be known as Santa Cruz Quiche was
not built on the ruins of Rotten Cane itself but three kilometers east
of there.
SERPENTS Cumatz, A people belonging to a group of thirteen allied
tribes the Quiches regarded as having come (like themselves) from
the east.
SEVEN CANE Uucub [uukub] ah, "seven cane plant." Crier to the
People for the Lords in the sixth generation of Lord Quiche lords.
Apparently born on the day Seven Cane on the divinatory calendar;
today such a birth date would augur good luck in all the affairs of
life and a potential career as a dutiful priest-shaman or official.
SEVEN CAVES, SEVEN CANYONS Uucub [uukub] pec, uucub ziuan. An
epithet for Tulan Zuyua, the citadel where the ruling Quiche
lineages acquired their patron deities. Uucub pec is a Quiche
translation of Chicomoztoc, the "seven caves" of the mythic Nahua
place of origin. The ruins of both Teotihuacan and Xochicalco have
natural caves beneath them; Rotten Cane has an artificial cave that
penetrates to a point beneath the main plaza.
SEVEN MACAW Uucub caquix [uukub cakix], in which the term for macaw
is composed of cak, "red," and perhaps quiix, "feathers." A lord who
falsely claimed to be both the sun and moon during the era of the
wooden people, causing offense to Hurricane; husband of Chimalmat

Page 226 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

and father of Zipacna and Earthquake. From his red feathers and from
his nose that "shines white", the macaw in question could only be
the scarlet macaw (Ara macao), which displays more red feathers than
the military macaw (Ara militaris) and contrasts with the latter in
having a white beak. The P.V. does not specify Seven Macaw's actual
astronomical identification (as contrasted with his false claim to
be the sun), but A. gives it as Ursa Major, whose prominent stars
(comprising the Big Dipper) number seven. In West Indian Carib myths
the Big Dipper has a feathered headdress that shows by day as the
rainbow, which suggests that Seven Macaw might also have a rainbow
aspect. What the Big Dipper has in common with the rainbow is that its
appearance marks the end of storms, only it does so seasonally. In the
latitudes of Mesoamerica and the Caribbean, the hurricane season
(mid-July to mid-October) begins with nights on which the Big Dipper
is already in steep descent at twilight and disappears entirely for as
much as half the night, and it ends with the first nights on which all
seven stars of the newly ascending Big Dipper appear before dawn. To
put this in terms of the P.V., when Hunahpu and Xbalanque (acting on
behalf of Hurricane) bring Seven Macaw down out of his tree (or
below the horizon), they open the way for the great rain that destroys
the people for whom Seven Macaw was the sun.
SEVEN THOUGHT Uucub noh [uukub naoh]. Keeper of the Mat in the
eleventh generation of Cauec lords, apparently born on the day Seven
Thought on the divinatory calendar. Today, such a birth date would
augur an ability to solve problems, potential leadership, and a
markedly masculine character.
SHIELD DANCE Pocob, "shield," not only an implement of war but
"an ancient dance" (B.). A dance performed by the Quiche lords while
they were settled at Bearded Place.
SHOOTING OWL 4habi tucur, in which tucur is "owl"; 4ha is
"arrow," but better yet, B. gives chabih as "stoop like a hawk."
First-ranking Military Keeper of the Mat for the lords of Xibalba, a
messenger. The four owls of Xibalba are able to reach the eastern ball
court used by One and Seven Hunahpu and by One Monkey and One Artisan,
but in contrast with Falcon, the messenger of the Heart of Sky, or
Hurricane, they are not described as being able to reach the place
where the Heart of Sky is located. They may correspond to the planet
Mercury, with perhaps one pair of owls for its morning star aspect and
the other for its evening star aspect.
SKULL OWL Holom tucur, "head (or skull) owl." Fourth-ranking
Military Keeper of the Mat for the lords of Xibalba, a messenger.
Along with the other three owl messengers, he may correspond to the
planet Mercury (see Shooting Owl).
SKY-EARTH Cahuleu, composed of cah, "sky," and uleu, "earth," but
pronounced as a single word. In this context "sky" and "earth" are
complementary metonyms that together produce the sense of "world," but
without any final reduction of the difference between sky and earth.
This composite word is used in contemporary Quiche prayers.
SNATCH-BATS Camazotz [4amazo4,], composed of 4ama, "take," and

Page 227 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

zo4,, "bat." The bats that inhabit the Bat House of Xibalba. B.
lists camotzoh as "an animal that eats the moon." Andres Xiloj
commented, "These are not animal bats, but the bats of Xibalba." Today
in Rabinal the dance-drama of San Jorge includes a character of this
same name.
SORREL GUM Lotz quic [qui4], in which qui4 (literally "blood") is
the term for latex or other plant products of a gummy consistency.
SOVEREIGN OLOMAN Tepeu oloman or oliman, from Nahua tepeuani (see
Sovereign Plumed Serpent) and ollomani, "ballplayer" (D.). A people,
also called Fishkeepers, probably from the Gulf coast of Tabasco or
eastern Veracruz. They stayed in the "east" when the Quiche
ancestors left there, but later, during the time the Quiches were
settled in the citadel of Hacauitz, they participated in a plot
against them.
SOVEREIGN PLUMED SERPENT Tepeu 4ucumatz [3ucumatz], in which
tepeu is an honorific title and the second word is composed of 3u3,
"quetzal bird or quetzal feathers," and cumatz, "snake." Tepeu is from
Nahua, in which tepeuani is "conqueror or victor in battle" (D.);
Quiche tepeual, a participial form (marked by -al), is translated by
B. as "majesty, dignity." 3ucumatz is the equivalent in Quiche of
Yucatec Kukulcan and Nahua Quetzalcoatl, both of which names mean
"quetzal-plumed serpent." As a god, the Plumed Serpent is nearly
always prefixed with tepeu in the P.V.; he numbers among the gods
who are covered by the names or epithets Maker, Modeler; Bearer,
Begetter; and Heart of the Lake, Heart of the Sea. In the primordial
scene these gods, unlike the god or gods called Heart of Sky,
Hurricane, Newborn Thunderbolt, and Raw Thunderbolt, are on or in
the sea. Just as the Nahua Quetzalcoatl cooperates with Tezcatlipoca
in making the present earth in the midst of the sea, so the Quiche
Sovereign Plumed Serpent cooperates with Hurricane; the difference
is that the Nahua earth in question was the fifth, whereas the P.V.
seems to have it as the first. By the time Rotten Cane was founded,
Sovereign Plumed Serpent numbered among the most important of Quiche
gods, judging from the fact that the Keeper of the Plumed Serpent
was among the five heads of lordly lineages who were priests, the
others being priests of Tohil, Auilix, Hacauitz, and Corntassel. But
the writers of the P.V. neither give the story of Sovereign Plumed
Serpent's origin nor elaborate his divine attributes, and scarcely a
trace of him remains in today's Quiche oral narratives.
SOVEREIGN YAQUI Title of the lord who was ninth in rank among the
Cauecs and head of one of the nine great houses into which their
lineage was divided after the founding of Rotten Cane; he was also
called Mother of the Reception House.
SPILT WATER Maca [ma4aa] or pamaca [pama4aa], composed of pa,
"at" or "in"; ma4, "spill or fall"; and aa, "water." The town known
today as Zacualpa, formerly located two kilometers southeast of its
present site. Once a Rabinal citadel, conquered by the Quiche lords
during the reign of Quicab. Today the inhabitants speak Quiche.
STAGGERING Zilizib; zilizab is "sway, swing, stagger" (B.). The

Page 228 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

place where the tribes (other than the Cakchiquels) pledged themselves
to be "suckled" (or to have their hearts cut out) by Tohil in exchange
for fire; the name of this place is not mentioned until later.
STAR HOUSE, THOSE OF Ahchumilaha [ah4humilaha],
"persons-from-star-house." A people belonging to a group of thirteen
allied tribes the Quiches regarded as having come (like themselves)
from the east.
SUDDEN BLOODLETTER Camalotz, probably composed of cahmah,
"fright, surprise attack" (V.), and lotz, "to let blood." One of the
monsters that ends the era of the wooden people.
SUN-MOON Quihic [3ihi4], composed of 3ih, "sun," and i4, "moon,"
but pronounced as a single word. In this context "sun" and "moon"
are complementary metonyms that together produce an abstraction
encompassing major heavenly bodies (and major markers of time), but
without any final reduction of the difference between sun and moon.
The composite concept of sun-moon would include Venus as morning
star as well, since the latter has 3ih in its Quiche name (see
daybringer).
SWALLOWING SWORDS Xtzul [x4,ul], a proper name of uncertain
etymology. The name of a dance done by Hunahpu and Xbalanque in
their guise as vagabonds. B. describes it as a dance in which masked
performers with tortoise-shell rattles put sticks or daggers in
their mouths. V. (who specifies 4,, the glottalized tz), describes the
masks as small and says that the dancers are two in number (as they
are in the P.V.), wear the tails of macaws down their backs, put
sticks down their throats and bones into their noses, and give
themselves hard blows on their chests with a large stone.
SWEATBATH HOUSE Tuhalha. The people who inhabit the area around
Sacapulas today, belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes the
Quiches regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east;
they speak a highly distinctive dialect of Quiche. One of the four
sections of the town of Sacapulas still bears the name Tuhal.
SWEET DRINK Qui [quii], "sweet," "poison," and (according to G.)
"wine or chicha," chicha generally being an alcoholic beverage made by
fermenting corn. It is not known for certain what went into the making
of quii; the pulque of Mexico (made from maguey) is not reliably
reported for indigenous Guatemala, nor is the drink the Yucatec Maya
called balche (partly made from honey). What is known about quii is
that it required cooking at some stage, that it took three days to
ferment, and that the Four Hundred Boys went "out of their senses"
drinking it. The making of balche does not involve cooking, but at
least one kind of pulque does (a variety in which maguey cuttings
are boiled together with honey prior to fermentation). Pulque and
balche are both sweet to the taste before fermentation and bitter
afterward; perhaps the seemingly contradictory meanings of quii
reflect the paradox of a drink that started out sweet and harmless and
ended up bitter and (in sufficient quantities) sickening.
TALK HOUSE Uchabaha [u4habaha], "its-talk-place-house." A people
belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes the Quiches regarded as

Page 229 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

having come (like themselves) from the east.
TAMAZUL From Nahua tamazolin, "toad" (C.); the Quiche term for this
animal is xpek. The name of the toad that swallowed the louse that
carried the message of Xmucane.
TAMS Tamub (singular tam). One of the allied groups of lineages
called "the three Quiches," the other two members being the Quiche
proper- comprising the Cauecs, Greathouses, and Lord Quiches- and
the Ilocs.
TAM TRIBE Amac [ama3] tan, composed of the term for "tribe" and
an archaic pronunciation of tam. Place where the Tams gave a home to
their patron deity, not far from where the Ilocs, Cauecs, Greathouses,
and Lord Quiches did the same; also the place where the Tams were when
the dawn first came.
TEARING JAGUAR Tucumbalam, probably composed of tucun, "scratch"
(V.), and balam, "jaguar." One of the monsters that ends the era of
the wooden people.
TECUM A Nahua name of uncertain translation. Keeper of the Mat in
the ninth generation of Cauec lords; a second Tecum held the same
position in the thirteenth generation. The latter Tecum was taken
hostage when Rotten Cane fell to the Spanish in 1524; he was the son
of Three Deer, the Keeper of the Mat who was executed by Alvarado.
Tecum's accession to his father's title was later recognized by
Alvarado, who made that position subordinate to himself, but Tecum
plotted rebellion and was eventually hanged. He is not to be
confused with the warrior named Tecum Umam, who died in a battle
with Alvarado's forces before the attack on Rotten Cane took place.
TEPEPUL From Nahua tepe, "mountain," and pol, "big" (C.). Keeper of
the Mat in the fifth or sixth generation of Cauec lords; taken
prisoner in an attack on the Cakchiquels. Another Tepepul was Keeper
of the Mat in the eighth generation of Cauec lords, and still others
were Keepers of the Reception House Mat in the ninth and thirteenth
generations of Cauec lords. This last Tepepul, along with the last
Tecum, was taken hostage when Rotten Cane fell to the Spanish in 1524;
he was the son of Nine Dog, the Keeper of the Reception House Mat
who was executed by Alvarado. Tepepul's accession to his father's
title was later recognized by Alvarado, who made that position
subordinate to himself, but Tepepul plotted rebellion and was hanged
in 1540.
THORNY PLACE Chiquix [chi4ix], "at thorns." Citadel of the Quiche
lords after they left Hacauitz and before they built Bearded Place. It
was divided into four parts or "mountains": Dry Place, Bark House,
Culba, and Cauinal. Dry Place is chichac [chichak], "at dryness"; Bark
House is humetaha, composed of humeta, "bark," and ha, "house." Thorny
Place doubtless corresponds to the archaeological site known today
as Cauinal (beneath a mountain of the same name), on the Rio Blanco
near its confluence with the Rio Negro or Chixoy, about twenty
kilometers northwest of Rabinal. The site has four main plazas, two on
each side of the Rio Blanco; it is located in a dry region dominated
by xerophytic vegetation, in which it contrasts with most of the

Page 230 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

area occupied by the Quiches today.
THREE DEER Oxib quieh. Keeper of the Mat in the twelfth
generation of Cauec lords, apparently born on the day Three Deer on
the divinatory calendar. Today such a birth date would augur a
domineering, articulate, and masculine character, with possible
shamanic inclinations, but because of the low number, these
qualities would be present in only moderate quantity. According to the
P.V. Three Deer was hanged by the Castilians; other sources have him
burned at the stake. In any case he and Nine Dog were executed by
Alvarado in 1524, immediately following the fall of Rotten Cane.
THRONG BIRDS 4,iquin molai, "birds joined together." Possibly a
mythic species, or possibly referring to a flock rather than a
species. One of the obstacles on the road to Xibalba (the underworld).
TOHIL Patron deity of the Cauec, Tam, and Iloc lineages; the name
sometimes covers the patron deities of the Greathouse and Lord
Quiche lineages as well, Auilix and Hacauitz. Apparently the name is
composed of Toh, one of the twenty day names of the 260-day
calendar, and -il, "having the quality of"; Toh may be related to
Cholan tohokna, "the way in which clouds join," and tohmel,
"thunder" (C.), but the classic Maya predecessor of Tohil at
Palenque carries the name Tahil, meaning "Torch Mirror" or "Obsidian
Mirror" (S.). Tahil is shown with a burning torch sticking out of
the mirror on his forehead; Tohil is a giver of fire, pivoting
inside his own sandal like a fire drill. The one-leggedness
suggested by the fire drill, together with the fact that Tohil can
cause great rainstorms, identify him as an aspect of Hurricane (see
above). The stone whose genius or spirit familiar was Tohil was
carried in a backpack by Jaguar Quitze, founder of the Cauecs, when he
left Tulan Zuyua. He placed this stone on a mountain that came to be
called Patohil, literally "At Tohil," apparently located above or near
Concealment Canyon, where the god Auilix was placed. A temple
dedicated to Tohil was later built at Rotten Cane (see Great
Monument of Tohil); those bringing tribute to Rotten Cane, which was
probably payable on days named Toh, gave offerings to Tohil before
they made their presentations to the Quiche lords. The present
character of the day Toh seems to reflect its past connection with
tribute. One of the divinatory mnemonics for the meaning of this day
is tohonic, "to pay," indicating that the client owes offerings to the
gods and the ancestors. In visits to shrines, daykeepers use Toh
days to make up for delinquent ritual obligations.
TOHIL MEDICINE Cunabal tohil, "cure-instrument Tohil." An epithet
given to Concealment Canyon after Tohil was placed nearby on the
mountain called Patohil. This epithet may be based on a bilingual
pun on the place name Patohil; Nahuatl patli means "medicine" (D.).
TOHIL'S BATH Ratinibal tohil, "his-bathing-place Tohil." During the
time when the Quiche lords occupied the citadel of Hacauitz, the
spirit familiars of Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz were regularly seen
bathing at this place (location unknown).
TONATIUH Donadiu, a Nahua word meaning "sun." This was the name

Page 231 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

given by the Indians of central Mexico to Pedro de Alvarado before
he came to Guatemala.
TORTILLA GRIDDLE Xot. A round and slightly concave pottery griddle,
used in toasting tortillas; better known in Mesoamerica as the
comal, from Nahua comalli.
TRASH MASTER, STAB MASTER Ahal mez, ahal tocob [to3ob], "owner
filth (or trash), owner puncture wound." These lords of Xibalba rank
ninth and tenth in earlier lists but are omitted from later ones.
See also Bloody Teeth, Bloody Claws.
TRUE JAGUAR Iquibalam, with balam, "jaguar," possibly prefixed with
iki- (V.) or iqui- (X.). This prefix can be combined with a3ab,
"hand," to give "right hand," and with tzih, "word," to give "truth"
(V.); it is probably present in the expression of affirmation given by
B. as iquiquih. True Jaguar was one of the first four human males, but
he had no son and therefore did not found a lineage.
TULAN From Nahua tollan, "Place of Reeds (or Cattails)." A term
widely used in Mesoamerica to prefix the names of places where the
investiture of Toltecan lords could take place. The P.V. states that
the Quiches, Cakchiquels, and various other tribes were assigned their
patron deities at Tulan, before the first sunrise; it locates Tulan in
the east, perhaps recalling the direction from which the Quiches
happened to be moving immediately before coming into the region of
their present home rather than the absolute spatial relationship
between that home and Tulan. Tulan is nearly always joined to the name
Zuyua in the P.V. (see below).
UNDER TEN Xelahuh, "under (or below) ten"; the full name (not given
in the P.V.) is xelahuh queh, "Under Ten Deer." This town is still
called Xelaju or Xela in everyday Guatemalan speech, whether in
Spanish or in an indigenous language, but in government documents
and on maps it is known by a slightly altered form of its Nahau
name, Quezaltenango (it should be spelled Quetzaltenango, meaning
"Quetzal Citadel"). Its former location, when it was truly a
citadel, must have been on one of the hilltops in the vicinity of
the present town, but the exact site is not known. It was among the
citadels conquered by the Quiche lords during the reign of Quicab.
UNDER THE TWINE, UNDER THE CORD Xebalax, xecamac, in which xemay be "under" but could also be a verb prefix indicating completed
action and the third person plural; balax may be a passive form of
bal, "to make or twist a cord" (V.), and camac may be 4aamak, a
perfect form of 4aamah, "to cord (measure land with a cord)." A
place in Chulimal or perhaps an epithet for Chulimal. This is where
the heads of vassal lineages were elevated to lordship and assigned to
conquered territories during the reign of Quicab; the name may
allude to the setting of boundaries for these territories.
VASSALS Al4ahol, "children," a composite term made up of al, "child
(of a woman)," and 4ahol, "son (of a man)." The term for members of
commoner lineages owing fealty to lordly lineages. Vassalage was a
sort of kinship by adoption, but note that the term clouds or averts
the issue of lineality by including the term for a woman's children.

Page 232 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

During the reign of Quicab the first-ranking male members of many
vassal lineages were elevated to lordship.
WALKING ON STILTS Chitic, "to go on stilts" (B.). The name of a
dance done by Hunahpu and Xbalanque in their guise as vagabonds.
WEASEL, DANCE OF THE Xahoh cux, "dance weasel." The name of a dance
done by Hunahpu and Xbalanque in their guise as vagabonds. B. mentions
a dance (cux) done with weasel skins.
WHITE CORNMEALS Zacahib [zak4ahib], "white-cornmeal-plural." A
people belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes the Quiches
regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east. They must
have settled in the area of the present town of Salcaja, which is
called zak4aha in Quiche.
WHITE DAGGER Zaqui toc [zaki to3]; V. gives to3 as "knife" or
"stab"; it is the Cholan term for implements of flaked stone (K.),
which are cha in Quiche. The name of the sacrificial knife belonging
to the lords of Xibalba and of the ball (containing this knife) they
are anxious to use in their game with Hunahpu and Xbalanque.
WHITE EARTHS Zaculeuab [zakuleuab], "white-earth-plural." A tribe
named after the citadel of Zakuleu (located five kilometers west of
the present town of Huehuetenango) and comprising part or all of the
speakers of the Mayan language known today as Mam. The P.V. does not
claim that the Quiche lords conquered Zakuleu itself, but rather a
separate citadel belonging to the White Earths, named Above the Hot
Springs.
WHITE RIVER Zaqui ya [zaki yaa], "white water." A place four
kilometers west of Chichicastenango, occupied by vassals of the Quiche
lords during the reign of Quicab.
WHITE ROAD Zaquibe [zakibe]. One of four cosmic roads (see
Crossroads). Today, at least, this is the term for the solid white
portion of the Milky Way, as opposed to the Road of Xibalba (see
above), which is the portion divided by a dark cleft.
WHITE SPARKSTRIKER Zaqui coxol [zaki 4oxol], composed of zaki,
"white"; 4oxo, a verb stem used for the act of striking stones
together "to start a fire" (V.); and -l, agentive. In the P.V. this
being escapes into the shelter of the woods when the sun first
rises, taking along the animals that were petrified by the sun; in the
present-day Quiche dance-drama of the Conquest, he or she (the sex
is ambiguous) escapes into the woods to avoid Spanish domination. In
the drama the White Sparkstriker appears as a dwarf dressed entirely
in red, but may have silver clothing in dreams and visions. When the
sun rose and petrified the first animals, the White Sparkstriker
escaped into a tree and is now the keeper of the petrified animals
(iron concretions that resemble animals) and may be encountered in
caves, in deep woods, and at night. In some manifestations the White
Sparkstriker carries a stone hatchet- the one he-she used to strike
sheet lightning into the bodies of the first daykeepers, according
to Vicente de Leon Abac.
WHITE VULTURE Zac cuch [zak 4uch]. The king vulture (Sarcoramphus
papa), a lowland species which has a naked red head and black flight

Page 233 , Popol Vuh: the Mayan Book of the Dawn of Life - Dennis Tedlock with commentary based on the ancient

www.TaleBooks.com

feathers but is otherwise white.
WILLOW TREE Tzolohchee, "willow tree." The town known today as
Santa Maria Chiquimula. One of the citadels conquered by the Quiche
lords during the reign of Quicab.
WING, PACKSTRAP Xic [xi4], patan, "wing, packstrap," the latter
referring to a strip of hide used to protect the forehead when a
load is carried with a tumpline. These lords of Xibalba rank
eleventh and twelfth in earlier lists and ninth and tenth in later
ones.
XBALANQUE The younger brother of Hunahpu and the son of One Hunahpu
and Blood Woman; the full meaning of his name remains uncertain. X- is
archaic in Quiche but means "she of" or "small" in Cholan (K.);
balan is from balam, "jaguar"; que could be from queh, "deer," or it
could be like 3e in the Kekchi Maya term for "sun," zak3e, which is
composed of zak, "light," and 3e, "day" (F.). It has been reported
that one of the names of the sun god among the contemporary Kekchi
is xbalam3e (F.), which recalls the fact that Hunahpu and Xbalanque
become the sun and moon in the P.V. If the name Xbalanque literally
means "Little Jaguar Sun" in the P.V., it could refer specifically
to the full moon, which is metaphorically called "sun" by contemporary
Quiches; that would leave other phases of the moon to his mother,
Blood Woman. In Pokomchi Maya, xbalanque or xbalamque is the term
for species of fish of the family that includes perch and bass (Z.),
which recalls the fact that Hunahpu and Xbalanque are described as
taking the form of channel catfish after their ground bones are thrown
in water; perhaps it was specifically Hunahpu who became a catfish,
whereas Xbalanque became a bass.
XBAQUIYALO The x- is archaic in Quiche but "she of" or "small" in
Cholan (K.); the rest is of uncertain derivation but could include
bak, "bone" or "pit (of a fruit)." The wife of One Hunahpu and the
mother of One Monkey and One Artisan.
XCANUL [X4anul], in which the x- is archaic in Quiche but "she
of" or "small" in Cholan (K.). In the P.V. this is a proper name for
what is now called the Volcan Santa Maria (note the feminine
gender), nine kilometers south of Quezaltenango, but in the
present-day vocabulary of the western part of the Quiche-speaking
region it is a generic term for volcano.
XCUXEBA See Councilor of the Ball Court.
XIBALBA Probably derived, in part, from the same root as xibih,
"frighten"; the -al might have been participial and the final -ba
could have been -bal, "place of." The underworld, located below the
face of the earth (uuach uleu) but at the same time conceptualized
as being accessible by way of a road that descends cliffs and canyons,
probably in the general direction of the lowlands that lie to the
Atlantic side of the Guatemalan highlands. In Yucatec Maya, Xibalba is
one of the names for the lord of the lowest underworld. See also
Road of Xibalba.
XPIYACOC, XMUCANE Divine grandparents, probably older than all
the other gods; parents of One and Seven Hunahpu; patrons of the
diviners known as daykeepers (see above). Their epithets include
Grandmother of Day, Grandmother of Light (though Xpiyacoc is male);
Maker of the Blue-Green Plate, Maker of the Blue-Green Bowl; Great
White Peccary, Great White Tapir; and Bearer twice over, Begetter
twice over (as if to make them even older than the gods who are simply
called Bearer, Begetter). They are also described (respectively) as
a midwife and matchmaker, which are specialized subfields of
contemporary daykeepers (female and male respectively). That
Xpiyacoc is named first, reversing the normal feminine-masculine order
of Quiche phrasing, may reflect the fact that the two of them are
the Quiche counterparts of Cipactonal and Oxomoco, an old divining
couple named in masculine-feminine order in Nahua. The meaning of
the Quiche names is unclear, except that the initial x-, though
archaic in Quiche, means "she of" or "small" in Cholan (K.). The
feminine aspect of Xpiyacoc recalls the fact that contemporary
daykeepers (of either sex) are symbolically androgynous, female on the
left side of the body and male on the right. Andres Xiloj suggested
that the -pi- in Xpiyacoc might be -pe-, "to come," and he derived
-yac- from yequic (yaquic in some dialects), "to be put in order, to
be lifted up," a verb diviners use with reference to the problems of
clients. In classical Quiche yaco is a numeral classifier for counting
tribute (B.); the yaco in Xpiyacoc could refer to the counting (and
manipulation) of the divining seeds rather than to the "lifting up" of
the client. In the case of Xmucane, Xiloj derived mucane from moconic,
"to do something requested" or "to do a favor"; he pointed out that
a diviner who has ascertained the cause of a problem may then be hired
to make prayers and offerings on behalf of the client. To this day,
a daykeeper ideally has a spouse who is also a daykeeper, and the
divinations with the clearest outcomes are the ones they do together.
XTAH, XPUCH The x- is archaic in Quiche but "she of" or "small"
in Cholan (K.). The two women sent (by tribes hostile to the
Quiches) to seduce Tohil, Auilix, and Hacauitz. On the positive
side, -tah could be read as "goods, riches, gifts" (V.), and xpuch
could be read as a borrowing from Nahua ichpuchtli, "maiden" (D.).
On the other hand, tahih is "to sin many times" (V.), and puchu is "to
smash, disembowel" (B.).
XTAYUB Possibly a variant spelling of Iztayul (see above). Keeper
of the Reception House Mat in the eighth generation of Cauec lords.
XULU, PACAM Names of the diviners consulted by the lords of Xibalba
on the question of how to dispose of the remains of Hunahpu and
Xbalanque. V. describes xulu as "[spirit] familiars appearing
alongside rivers"; an ahxulu, or "keeper of Xulu," is a curer (V.)
or a diviner (B.). Pacam could be composed of pa, "at" or "in," and
cam, "bridge" (B.).
YACOLATAM, OR EDGE OF THE ZACLATOL MAT Yacolatam, utzam pop
zaclatol; yaco- is "to lift," and V. gives yac as a particle for
counting tribute; utzam pop is "its-edge (possibly fringe) mat"; zac
is likely zak, "white" or "light"; the rest is untranslatable.
Yacolatam is listed by itself the second time it is mentioned. Title
of the lord who ranked eighth among the Greathouses and was head of
one of the nine great houses into which their lineage was divided
after the founding of Rotten Cane.
YAQUI PEOPLE Yaqui uinac [uinak], in which yaqui is Nahua for
"gone, departed" (C.) and uinak is Quiche for "people." This refers to
Nahua speakers who were present in the citadel of Tulan Zuyua at the
same time the Quiches, Rabinals, Cakchiquels, and those of the Bird
House (Tzutuhils) were there; according to the P.V., their god (called
Yolcuat and Quitzalcuat) was equivalent to Tohil. See also "The
Blame Is Ours."
YAQUI SOVEREIGN Probably the same as the Yaqui people (see above).
YARROW Holom ocox, "head of mushroom." A common aromatic herb in
the Guatemalan highlands, named for the shape of its composite
flower head, which consists of numerous tiny, closely spaced white
blossoms; probably Stevia eupatoria, called pericon blanco in Spanish.
In the P.V. (as among today's Quiche) the burning of this herb,
together with marigolds (see above), constitutes a more modest
offering than the burning of copal incense.
YELLOWBITE Canti [3anti], in which 3an is "yellow" and ti is from
the same root as tiinic, "to eat (meat)." The snake commonly known
as the fer-de-lance, which has a yellow zone around the mouth.
YELLOW ROAD 3anabe. One of four cosmic roads (see Crossroads).
YELLOWWOOD Cante [3ante], in which 3an is "yellow" and te is Cholan
for "wood" or "tree" (C.). A. gives 3ante as the madre cacao
(Gliricidia sepium), a large tree that is planted to provide shade
in cacao plantations. Hunahpu and Xbalanque send One Monkey and One
Artisan up this tree in order to transform them into monkeys.
YOKE Bate, from Cholan bat, which is today "ax, shovel, blade," and
te, "wood, tree" (C.). Part of the equipment necessary for the ball
game played in the P.V. (see gaming equipment). Each player in the
Mesoamerican ball game had a yoke-shaped object of wood riding on
his hips; it was with this yoke that he returned the ball, which could
not be touched with the hands while it was in play. The upper, outer
rim of this yoke is often depicted with a mildly sharpened edge. Among
all the words for the gaming equipment in the P.V., bate is the best
candidate as a term for the yoke. First of all, bate is used as a term
for the game itself over wide areas of Mesoamerica; since the yoke
is one of the most distinctive features of the game, it could well
have given its name to the game itself at some remote point in the
past. Second, it was the bate with which Hunahpu and Xbalanque
received and returned the ball when they played the game against the
lords of Xibalba.
YOKE HOUSE, THOSE OF Ahbatenaba, "person-from-yoke-plural-house." A
people belonging to a group of thirteen allied tribes the Quiches
regarded as having come (like themselves) from the east.
YOLCUAT From Nahua yol, "heart," and coatl, "snake" (C.). One of
the names of the god of the Yaqui people, who is said by the writers
of the P.V. to be the same as Tohil.
ZAPOTES Tulul. A tropical fruit (Lucuma mammosa), sometimes
called "sapota" in English. The tan skin resembles suede; the flesh is
chocolate-colored.
ZAQUIC A lordly lineage divided into two great houses after the
founding of Rotten Cane; not mentioned as having come from the east
with the lordly Quiche lineages or as having been present at Tulan.
The Zaquics may have been indigenous to the area around Chinique,
and they may have been adopted by the Cauecs, Greathouses, and Lord
Quiches to fill out an ideal foursome that was left short by the
fact that True Jaguar (one of the first four human males) had no sons.
ZAQUICAZ V. gives zaki3az as "a very thick snake that flees when it
sees people, making a noise with its belly." This is the snake that
swallows the toad that swallows the louse that carries the message
of Xmucane.
ZIPACNA Derived from the same source as Nahua cipactli, referring
to a mythological animal, with the features of a crocodile and
sometimes those of a shark, that gives its name to the Nahua day
corresponding to Imox on the Quiche calendar. That Zipacna hunts
fish and crabs from a position on shore fits the crocodile
identification, but the Quiche term for crocodile, ayin, does not
occur in the P.V. Zipacna is the son of Seven Macaw and Chimalmat
and the elder brother of Earthquake; he claims to be the maker of
mountains and even of the earth in general.
ZIYA HOUSE Ziyaha, in which -ha is "house." A place of unknown
location, occupied by vassals of the Quiche lords during the reign
of Quicab.
ZUYUA In the P.V. this name (sometimes rendered as zuua) always
appears as part of the compound name Tulan Zuyua, referring to the
town where the Quiches and related peoples are said to have been given
the stones containing the spirit familiars of their patron deities
(see also Tulan). Zuyua was probably on the system of lakes,
lagoons, and estuaries that stretches from southwestern Campeche
through Tabasco to eastern Veracruz, known in Nahua as Nonoalco. The
etymology of the name remains unsolved.

